When he emerges from the bathroom she is
awake, propped up against the pillows and flicking
through the travel brochures that were beside
his bed. She is wearing one of his T-shirts, and
her long hair is tousled in a way that prompts reflexive
thoughts of the previous night. He stands
there, enjoying the brief flashback, rubbing the
water from his hair with a towel.
She looks up from a brochure and pouts. She is
probably slightly too old to pout, but they’ve been
going out a short enough time for it still to be
cute.
‘Do we really have to do something that involves
trekking up mountains, or hanging over
ravines? It’s our first proper holiday together,
and there is literally not one single trip in these
that doesn’t involve either throwing yourself off
something or –’ she pretends to shudder ‘– wearing
fleece.’
She throws them down on the bed, stretches
her caramel-coloured arms above her head. Her
voice is husky, testament to their missed hours
of sleep. ‘How about a luxury spa in Bali? We
could lie around on the sand … spend hours being
pampered … long relaxing nights … ’
‘I can’t do those sorts of holidays. I need to be
doing something.’‘This is the annexe. It used to be stables, but we
realized it would suit Will rather better than the
house as it’s all on one floor. This is the spare
room so that Nathan can stay over if necessary.
We needed someone quite often in the early
days.’
Mrs Traynor walked briskly down the corridor,
gesturing from one doorway to the other, without
looking back, her high heels clacking on the flagstones.
There seemed to be an expectation that I
would keep up.
‘The keys to the car are here. I’ve put you on
our insurance. I’m trusting the details you gave
me were correct. Nathan should be able to show
you how the ramp works. All you have to do is
help Will position properly and the vehicle will
do the rest. Although …he’s not desperately
keen to go anywhere at the moment.’
‘It is a bit chilly out,’ I said.
Mrs Traynor didn’t seem to hear me.
‘You can make yourself tea and coffee in the
kitchen. I keep the cupboards stocked. The bathroom
is through here –’
She opened the door and I stared at the white
metal and plastic hoist that crouched over the
bath. There was an open wet area under the
shower, with a folded wheelchair beside it. In the
corner a glass-fronted cabinet revealed neat
stacks of shrink-wrapped bales. I couldn’t see
what they were from here, but it all gave off a
faint scent of disinfectant.
Mrs Traynor closed the door, and turned
briefly to face me. ‘I should reiterate, it is very
important that Will has someone with him all the
time. A previous carer disappeared for several
hours once to get her car fixed, and Will … injured
himself in her absence.’ She swallowed, as
if still traumatized by the memory.
‘I won’t go anywhere.’
‘Of course you will need … comfort breaks. I
just want to make it clear that he can’t be left for
periods longer than, say, ten or fifteen minutes.
If something unavoidable comes up either ring
the intercom, as my husband, Steven, may be
home, or call my mobile number. If you do need
to take any time off, I would appreciate as much
notice as possible. It is not always easy finding
cover.’
‘No.’
Mrs Traynor opened the hall cupboard. She
spoke like someone reciting a well-rehearsed
speech.
I wondered briefly how many carers there had
been before me.
‘If Will is occupied, then it would be helpful if
you could do some basic housekeeping. Wash
bedding, run a vacuum cleaner around, that sort
of thing. The cleaning equipment is under the
sink. He may not want you around him all the
time. You and he will have to work out your
level of interaction for yourselves.’
Mrs Traynor looked at my clothes, as if for the
first time. I was wearing the very shaggy waistcoat
thing that Dad says makes me look like an
emu. I tried to smile. It seemed like an effort.
‘Obviously I would hope that you
could … get on with each other. It would be nice
if he could think of you as a friend rather than a
paid professional.’
‘Right. What does he … um … like to do?’
‘He watches films. Sometimes he listens to
the radio, or to music. He has one of those digital
things. If you position it near his hand, he can
usually manipulate it himself. He has some
movement in his fingers, although he finds it
hard to grip.’
I felt myself brightening. If he liked music and
films, surely we could find some common
ground? I had a sudden picture of myself and
this man laughing at some Hollywood comedy,
me running the Hoover around the bedroom
while he listened to his music. Perhaps this was
going to be okay. Perhaps we might end up as
friends. I had never had a disabled friend before
– only Treen’s friend David, who was deaf, but
would put you in a headlock if you suggested
that meant disabled.
‘Do you have any questions?’
‘No.’
‘Then let’s go and introduce you.’ She
glanced at her watch. ‘Nathan should have finished
dressing him now.’
We hesitated outside the door and Mrs
Traynor knocked. ‘Are you in there? I have Miss
Clark to meet you, Will.’
There was no answer.
‘Will? Nathan?’
A broad New Zealand accent. ‘He’s decent,
Mrs T.’
She pushed open the door. The annexe’s living
room was deceptively large, and one wall
consisted entirely of glass doors that looked out
over open countryside. A wood burner glowed
quietly in the corner, and a low beige sofa faced
a huge flat-screen television, its seats covered by
a wool throw. The mood of the room was tasteful,
and peaceful – a Scandinavian bachelor pad.
In the centre of the room stood a black wheelchair,
its seat and back cushioned by sheepskin.
A solidly built man in white collarless scrubs
was crouching down, adjusting a man’s feet on
the footrests of the wheelchair. As we stepped
into the room, the man in the wheelchair looked
up from under shaggy, unkempt hair. His eyes
met mine and after a pause, he let out a bloodcurdling
groan. Then his mouth twisted, and he
let out another unearthly cry.
I felt his mother stiffen.
‘Will, stop it!’
He didn’t even glance towards her. Another
prehistoric sound emerged from somewhere near
his chest. It was a terrible, agonizing noise. I
tried not to flinch. The man was grimacing, his
head tilted and sunk into his shoulders as he
stared at me through contorted features. He
looked grotesque, and vaguely angry. I realized
that where I held my bag, my knuckles had
turned white.
‘Will! Please.’ There was a faint note of hysteria
in his mother’s voice. ‘Please, don’t do
this.’
Oh God, I thought. I’m not up to this. I swallowed,
hard. The man was still staring at me. He
seemed to be waiting for me to do something.
‘I – I’m Lou.’ My voice, uncharacteristically
tremulous, broke into the silence. I wondered,
briefly, whether to hold out a hand and then, remembering
that he wouldn’t be able to take it,
gave a feeble wave instead. ‘Short for Louisa.’
Then to my astonishment his features cleared,
and his head straightened on his shoulders.
Will Traynor gazed at me steadily, the faintest
of smiles flickering across his face. ‘Good morning,
Miss Clark,’ he said. ‘I hear you’re my latest
minder.’
Nathan had finished adjusting the footrests.
He shook his head as he stood up. ‘You are a bad
man, Mr T. Very bad.’ He grinned, and held out
a broad hand, which I shook limply. Nathan exuded
an air of unflappability. ‘I’m afraid you just
got Will’s best Christy Brown impression.
You’ll get used to him. His bark is worse than
his bite.’
Mrs Traynor was holding the cross at her neck
with slim white fingers. She moved it backwards
and forwards along its thin gold chain, a nervous
habit. Her face was rigid. ‘I’ll leave you all to
get on. You can call through using the intercom
if you need any help. Nathan will talk you
through Will’s routines, and his equipment.’
‘I’m here, mother. You don’t have to talk
across me. My brain isn’t paralysed. Yet.’
‘Yes, well, if you’re going to be foul, Will, I
think it’s best if Miss Clark does talk directly to
Nathan.’ His mother wouldn’t look at him as she
spoke, I noticed. She kept her gaze about ten feet
away on the floor. ‘I’m working from home
today. So I’ll pop in at lunchtime, Miss Clark.’
‘Okay.’ My voice emerged as a squawk.
Mrs Traynor disappeared. We were silent
while we listened to her clipped footsteps disappearing
down the hall towards the main house.
Then Nathan broke the silence. ‘You mind if I
go and talk Miss Clark through your meds, Will?
You want the television? Some music?’
‘Radio Four please, Nathan.’
‘Sure thing.’
We walked through to the kitchen.
‘You not had much experience with quadriplegics,
Mrs T says?’
‘No.’
‘Okay. I’ll keep it fairly simple for today.
There’s a folder here that tells you pretty much
everything you need to know about Will’s
routines, and all his emergency numbers. I’d advise
you to read it, if you get a spare moment.
I’m guessing you’ll have a few.’
Nathan took a key from his belt and opened a
locked cabinet, which was packed full of boxes
and small plastic canisters of medication. ‘Right.
This lot is mostly my bag, but you do need to
know where everything is in case of emergencies.
There’s a timetable there on the wall so you
can see what he has when on a daily basis. Any
extras you give him you mark in there –’ he
pointed ‘– but you’re best to clear anything
through Mrs T, at least at this stage.’
‘I didn’t realize I was going to have to handle
drugs.’
‘It’s not hard. He mostly knows what he
needs. But he might need a little help getting
them down. We tend to use this beaker here. Or
you can crush them with this pestle and mortar
and put them in a drink.’
I picked up one of the labels. I wasn’t sure I
had ever seen so many drugs outside a pharmacy.
‘Okay. So he has two meds for blood pressure,
this to lower it at bedtime, this one to raise
it when he gets out of bed. These he needs fairly
often to control his muscular spasms – you will
need to give him one mid-morning, and again at
mid-afternoon. He doesn’t find those too hard to
swallow, because they’re the little coated ones.
These are for bladder spasms, and these here are
for acid reflux. He sometimes needs these after
eating if he gets uncomfortable. This is his antihistamine
for the morning, and these are his nasal
sprays, but I mostly do those last thing before
I leave, so you shouldn’t have to worry. He can
have paracetamol if he’s in pain, and he does
have the odd sleeping pill, but these tend to
make him more irritable in the daytime, so we
try to restrict them.
‘These –’ he held up another bottle ‘– are the
antibiotics he has every two weeks for his catheter
change. I do those unless I’m away, in which
case I’ll leave clear instructions. They’re pretty
strong. There are the boxes of rubber gloves, if
you need to clean him up at all. There’s also
cream there if he gets sore, but he’s been pretty
good since we got the air mattress.’
As I stood there, he reached into his pocket
and handed another key to me. ‘This is the
spare,’ he said. ‘Not to be given to anyone else.
Not even Will, okay? Guard it with your life.’
‘It’s a lot to remember.’ I swallowed.
‘It’s all written down. All you need to remember
for today are his anti-spasm meds. Those
ones. There’s my mobile number if you need to
call me. I’m studying when I’m not here, so I’d
rather not be called too often but feel free till you
feel confident.’
I stared at the folder in front of me. It felt like
I was about to sit an exam I hadn’t prepared for.
‘What if he needs … to go to the loo?’ I thought
of the hoist. ‘I’m not sure I could, you know, lift
him.’ I tried not to let my face betray my panic.
Nathan shook his head. ‘You don’t need to do
any of that. His catheter takes care of that. I’ll be
in at lunchtime to change it all. You’re not here
for the physical stuff.’
‘What am I here for?’
Nathan studied the floor before he looked at
me. ‘Try to cheer him up a little? He’s … he’s a
little cranky. Understandable, given … the circumstances.
But you’re going to have to have a
fairly thick skin. That little skit this morning is
his way of getting you off balance.’
‘Is this why the pay is so good?’
‘Oh yes. No such thing as a free lunch, eh?’
Nathan clapped me on the shoulder. I felt my
body reverberate with it. ‘Ah, he’s all right. You
don’t have to pussyfoot around him.’ He hesitated.
‘I like him.’
He said it like he might be the only person
who did.
I followed him back into the living room. Will
Traynor’s chair had moved to the window, and
he had his back to us and was staring out, listening
to something on the radio.
‘That’s me done, Will. You want anything before
I go?’
‘No. Thank you, Nathan.’
‘I’ll leave you in Miss Clark’s capable hands,
then. See you lunchtime, mate.’
I watched the affable helper putting on his
jacket with a rising sense of panic.
‘Have fun, you guys.’ Nathan winked at me,
and then he was gone.
I stood in the middle of the room, hands thrust
in my pockets, unsure what to do. Will Traynor
continued to stare out of the window as if I weren’t
there.
‘Would you like me to make you a cup of
tea?’ I said, finally, when the silence became unbearable.
‘Ah. Yes. The girl who makes tea for a living.
I wondered how long it would be before you
wanted to show off your skills. No. No, thank
you.’
‘Coffee, then?’
‘No hot beverages for me, just now, Miss
Clark.’
‘You can call me Lou.’
‘Will it help?’
I blinked, my mouth opening briefly. I closed
it. Dad always said it made me look more stupid
than I actually was. ‘Well … can I get you anything?’
He turned to look at me. His jaw was covered
in several weeks of stubble, and his eyes were
unreadable. He turned away.
‘I’ll –’ I cast around the room. ‘I’ll see if
there’s any washing, then.’
I walked out of the room, my heart thumping.
From the safety of the kitchen I pulled out my
mobile phone and thumped out a message to my
sister.
This is awful. He hates me.
The reply came back within seconds.
You have only been there an hour,
you wuss! M & D really
worried about money. Just get a grip
& think of hourly rate. X
I snapped my mobile phone shut, and blew out
my cheeks. I went through the laundry basket in
the bathroom, managing to raise a paltry quarter
load of washing, and spent some minutes checking
the instructions to the machine. I didn’t want
to mis-programme it or do anything which might
prompt Will or Mrs Traynor to look at me like I
was stupid again. I started the washing machine
and stood there, trying to work out what else I
could legitimately do. I pulled the vacuum cleaner
from the hall cupboard and ran it up and down
the corridor and into the two bedrooms, thinking
all the while that if my parents could see me they
would have insisted on taking a commemorative
photograph. The spare bedroom was almost
empty, like a hotel room. I suspected Nathan did
not stay over often. I thought I probably couldn’t
blame him.
I hesitated outside Will Traynor’s bedroom,
then reasoned that it needed vacuuming just like
anywhere else. There was a built-in shelf unit
along one side, upon which sat around twenty
framed photographs.
As I vacuumed around the bed, I allowed myself
a quick peek at them. There was a man bungee
jumping from a cliff, his arms outstretched
like a statue of Christ. There was a man who
might have been Will in what looked like jungle,
and him again in the midst of a group of drunken
friends. The men wore bow ties and dinner jackets
and had their arms around each other’s
shoulders.
There he was on a ski slope, beside a girl with
dark glasses and long blonde hair. I stooped, to
get a better view of him in his ski goggles. He
was clean-shaven in the photograph, and even in
the bright light his face had that expensive sheen
to it that moneyed people get through going on
holiday three times a year. He had broad, muscular
shoulders visible even through his ski jacket.
I put the photograph carefully back on the table
and continued to vacuum around the back of the
bed. Finally, I turned the vacuum cleaner off,
and began to wind the cord up. As I reached
down to unplug it, I caught a movement in the
corner of my eye and jumped, letting out a small
shriek. Will Traynor was in the doorway, watching
me.
‘Courchevel. Two and a half years ago.’
I blushed. ‘I’m sorry. I was just –’
‘You were just looking at my photographs.
Wondering how awful it must be to live like that
and then turn into a cripple.’
‘No.’ I blushed even more furiously.
‘The rest of my photographs are in the bottom
drawer if you find yourself overcome with curiosity
again,’ he said.
And then with a low hum the wheelchair
turned to the right, and he disappeared.
The morning sagged and decided to last for several
years. I couldn’t remember the last time
minutes and hours stretched so interminably. I
tried to find as many jobs to occupy myself as I
could, and went into the living room as seldom
as possible, knowing I was being cowardly, but
not really caring.
At eleven I brought Will Traynor a beaker of
water and his anti-spasm medication, as Nathan
had requested. I placed the pill on his tongue and
then offered him the beaker, as Nathan had instructed
me. It was pale, opaque plastic, the kind
of thing Thomas had used, except without Bob
the Builder on the sides. He swallowed with
some effort, and then signalled to me that I
should leave him alone.
I dusted some shelves that didn’t really need
dusting, and contemplated cleaning some windows.
Around me the annexe was silent, apart
from the low hum of the television in the living
room where he sat. I didn’t feel confident
enough to put on a music station in the kitchen. I
had a feeling he would have something cutting to
say about my choice in music.
At twelve thirty, Nathan arrived, bringing with
him the cold air of outside, and a raised eyebrow.
‘All okay?’ he said.
I had rarely been so happy to see someone in
my life. ‘Fine.’
‘Great. You can take a half-hour now. Me and
Mr T have a few things we attend to at this point
in the day.’
I almost ran for my coat. I hadn’t planned on
going out for lunch, but I was almost faint with
relief at getting out of that house. I pulled up my
collar, stuck my handbag on my shoulder, and
set off at a brisk walk down the drive, as if I had
somewhere I actually wanted to go. In fact, I just
walked around the surrounding streets for half an
hour, breathing hot clouds of breath into my
tightly wrapped scarf.
There were no cafes at this end of town, now
that The Buttered Bun was closed. The castle
was deserted. The nearest eating place was a
gastropub, the kind of place where I doubted I
could afford a drink, let alone a quick lunch. All
the cars in the car park were huge and expensive
with recent number plates.
I stood in the castle car park, making sure I
was out of view of Granta House, and dialled my
sister’s number. ‘Hey.’
‘You know I can’t talk at work. You haven’t
walked out, have you?’
‘No. I just needed to hear a friendly voice.’
‘Is he that bad?’
‘Treen, he hates me. He looks at me like I’m
something the cat dragged in. And he doesn’t
even drink tea. I’m hiding from him.’
‘I can’t believe I’m hearing this.’
‘What?’
‘Just talk to him, for crying out loud. Of
course he’s miserable. He’s stuck in a bloody
wheelchair. And you’re probably being useless.
Just talk to him. Get to know him. What’s the
worst that can happen?’
‘I don’t know … I don’t know if I can stick
it.’
‘I’m not telling Mum you’re giving up your
job after half a day. They won’t give you any benefits,
Lou. You can’t do this. We can’t afford
for you to do this.’
She was right. I realized I hated my sister.
There was a brief silence. Treen’s voice
turned uncharacteristically conciliatory. This
was really worrying. It meant she knew I did actually
have the worst job in the world. ‘Look,’
she said. ‘It’s just six months. Just do the six
months, have something useful on your CV and
you can get a job you actually like. And hey –
look at it this way, at least it’s not working
nights at the chicken factory, right?’
‘Nights at the chicken factory would feel like
a holiday compared with –’
‘I’m going now, Lou. I’ll see you later.’
‘So would you like to go somewhere this afternoon?
We could drive somewhere if you like.’
Nathan had been gone for almost half an hour.
I had spun out the washing of the tea mugs as
long as humanly possible, and I thought that if I
spent one more hour in this silent house my head
might explode.
He turned his head towards me. ‘Where did
you have in mind?’
‘I don’t know. Just a drive in the country?’ I
was doing this thing I sometimes do of pretending
I’m Treena. She is one of those people who
are completely calm and competent, and as a result
no one ever messes with her. I sounded, to
my own ears, professional and upbeat.
‘The country,’ he said, as if considering it.
‘And what would we see. Some trees? Some
sky?’
‘I don’t know. What do you normally do?’
‘I don’t do anything, Miss Clark. I can’t do
anything any more. I sit. I just about exist.’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘I was told that you have a car
that’s adapted for wheelchair use?’
‘And you’re worried that it will stop working
if it doesn’t get used every day?’
‘No, but I –’
‘Are you telling me I should go out?’
‘I just thought –’
‘You thought a little drive would be good for
me? A breath of fresh air?’
‘I’m just trying to –’
‘Miss Clark, my life is not going to be significantly
improved by a drive around Stortfold’s
country lanes.’ He turned away.
His head had sunk into his shoulders and I
wondered whether he was comfortable. It didn’t
seem to be the time to ask him. We sat in silence.
‘Do you want me to bring you your computer?’
‘Why, have you thought of a good quadriplegic
support group I could join? Quads R Us? The
Tin Wheel Club?’
I took a deep breath, trying to make my voice
sound confident. ‘Okay … well … seeing as
we’re going to spend all this time in each other’s
company perhaps we could get to know
something about each other –’
There was something about his face then that
made me falter. He was staring straight ahead at
the wall, a tic moving in his jaw.
‘It’s just … it’s quite a long time to spend
with someone. All day,’ I continued. ‘Perhaps if
you could tell me a little of what you want to do,
what you like, then I can … make sure things are
as you like them?’
This time the silence was painful. I heard my
voice slowly swallowed by it, and couldn’t work
out what to do with my hands. Treena and her
competent manner had evaporated.
Finally, the wheelchair hummed and he turned
slowly to face me.
‘Here’s what I know about you, Miss Clark.
My mother says you’re chatty.’ He said it like it
was an affliction. ‘Can we strike a deal?
Whereby you are very un-chatty around me?’
I swallowed, feeling my face flame.
‘Fine,’ I said, when I could speak again. ‘I’ll
be in the kitchen. If you want anything just call
me.’
‘You can’t give up already.’
I was lying sideways on my bed with my legs
stretched up the wall, like I did when I was a
teenager. I had been up here since supper, which
was unusual for me. Since Thomas was born, he
and Treena had moved into the bigger room, and
I was in the box room, which was small enough
to make you feel claustrophobic should you sit
in it for more than half an hour at a time.
But I didn’t want to sit downstairs with Mum
and Granddad because Mum kept looking at me
anxiously and saying things like ‘It will get better,
love’ and ‘No job is great on the first day’ –
as if she’d had a ruddy job in the last twenty
years. It was making me feel guilty. And I hadn’t
even done anything.
‘I didn’t say I was giving up.’
Treena had barged in without knocking, as she
did every day, even though I always had to
knock quietly on her room, in case Thomas was
sleeping.
‘And I could have been naked. You could at
least shout first.’
‘I’ve seen worse. Mum thinks you’re going to
hand in your notice.’
I slid my legs sideways down the wall and
pushed myself up to a seated position.
‘Oh God, Treen. It’s worse than I thought. He
is so miserable.’
‘He can’t move. Of course he’s miserable.’
‘No, but he’s sarcastic and mean with it.
Every time I say something or suggest
something he looks at me like I’m stupid, or says
something that makes me feel about two years
old.’
‘You probably did say something stupid. You
just need to get used to each other.’
‘I really didn’t. I was so careful. I hardly said
anything except “Would you like to go out for a
drive?” or “Would you like a cup of tea?”.’
‘Well, maybe he’s like that with everyone at
the start, until he knows whether you’re going to
stick around. I bet they get through loads of
helpers.’
‘He didn’t even want me in the same room as
him. I don’t think I can stick it, Katrina. I really
don’t. Honest – if you’d been there you would
understand.’
Treena said nothing then, just looked at me for
a while. She got up and glanced out of the door,
as if checking whether there was anybody on the
landing.
‘I’m thinking of going back to college,’ she
said, finally.
It took my brain a few seconds to register this
change of tack.
‘Oh my God,’ I said. ‘But –’
‘I’m going to take a loan to pay for the fees.
But I can get some special grant too, because of
having Thomas, and the university is offering me
reduced rates because they … ’ She shrugged, a
little embarrassed. ‘They say they think I could
excel. Someone’s dropped out of the business
studies course, so they can take me for the beginning
of the next term.’
‘What about Thomas?’
‘There’s a nursery on campus. We can stay
there in a subsidized flat in halls in the week,
and come back here most weekends.’
‘Oh.’
I could feel her watching me. I didn’t know
what to do with my face.
‘I’m really desperate to use my brain again.
Doing the flowers is doing my head in. I want to
learn. I want to improve myself. And I’m sick of
my hands always being freezing cold from the
water.’
We both stared at her hands, which were pink
tinged, even in the tropical warmth of our house.
‘But –’
‘Yup. I won’t be working, Lou. I won’t be
able to give Mum anything. I might … I might
even need a bit of help from them.’ This time
she looked quite uncomfortable. Her expression,
when she glanced up at me, was almost apologetic.
Downstairs Mum was laughing at something
on the television. We could hear her exclaiming
to Granddad. She often explained the plot of the
show to him, even though we told her all the
time she didn’t need to. I couldn’t speak. The
significance of my sister’s words sank in slowly
but inexorably. I felt like a Mafia victim must
do, watching the concrete setting slowly around
their ankles.
‘I really need to do this, Lou. I want more for
Thomas, more for both of us. The only way I’ll
get anywhere is by going back to college. I
haven’t got a Patrick. I’m not sure I’ll ever have
a Patrick, given that nobody’s been remotely interested
since I had Thomas. I need to do the
best I can by myself.’
When I didn’t say anything, she added, ‘For
me and Thomas.’
I nodded.
‘Lou? Please?’
I had never seen my sister look like that before.
It made me feel really uncomfortable. I lifted
my head, and raised a smile. My voice, when
it emerged, didn’t even sound like my own.
‘Well, like you say. It’s just a matter of getting
used to him. It’s bound to be difficult in the
first few days, isn’t it?’
‘Like throwing yourself out of aeroplanes.’
‘Don’t knock it till you’ve tried it.’
She pulls a face. ‘If it’s all the same to you, I
think I’ll stick with knocking it.’
His shirt is faintly damp against his skin. He
runs a comb through his hair and switches on his
mobile phone, wincing at the list of messages
that immediately pushes its way through on to
the little screen.
‘Right,’ he says. ‘Got to go. Help yourself to
breakfast.’ He leans over the bed to kiss her. She
smells warm and perfumed and deeply sexy. He
inhales the scent from the back of her hair, and
briefly loses his train of thought as she wraps her
arms around his neck, pulling him down towards
the bed.
‘Are we still going away this weekend?’
He extricates himself reluctantly. ‘Depends
what happens on this deal. It’s all a bit up in the
air at the moment. There’s still a possibility I
might have to be in New York. Nice dinner
somewhere Thursday, either way? Your choice
of restaurant.’ His motorbike leathers are on the
back of the door, and he reaches for them.
She narrows her eyes. ‘Dinner. With or
without Mr BlackBerry?’
‘What?’
‘Mr BlackBerry makes me feel like Miss
Gooseberry.’ The pout again. ‘I feel like there’s
always a third person vying for your attention.’
‘I’ll turn it on to silent.’
‘Will Traynor!’ she scolds. ‘You must have
some time when you can switch off.’
‘I turned it off last night, didn’t I?’
‘Only under extreme duress.’
He grins. ‘Is that what we’re calling it now?’
He pulls on his leathers. And Lissa’s hold on his
imagination is finally broken. He throws his motorbike
jacket over his arm, and blows her a kiss
as he leaves.
There are twenty-two messages on his Black-
Berry, the first of which came in from New York
at 3.42am. Some legal problem. He takes the lift
down to the underground car park, trying to update
himself with the night’s events.
‘Morning, Mr Traynor.’
The security guard steps out of his cubicle.
It’s weatherproof, even though down here there
is no weather to be protected from. Will sometimes
wonders what he does down here in the
small hours, staring at the closed-circuit television
and the glossy bumpers of £60,000 cars that
never get dirty.
He shoulders his way into his leather jacket.
‘What’s it like out there, Mick?’
‘Terrible. Raining cats and dogs.’
Will stops. ‘Really? Not weather for the
bike?’
Mick shakes his head. ‘No, sir. Not unless
you’ve got an inflatable attachment. Or a death
wish.’
Will stares at his bike, then peels himself out
of his leathers. No matter what Lissa thinks, he
is not a man who believes in taking unnecessary
risks. He unlocks the top box of his bike and
places the leathers inside, locking it and throwing
the keys at Mick, who catches them neatly
with one hand. ‘Stick those through my door,
will you?’
‘No problem. You want me to call a taxi for
you?’
‘No. No point both of us getting wet.’
Mick presses the button to open the automatic
grille and Will steps out, lifting a hand in thanks.
The early morning is dark and thunderous
around him, the Central London traffic already
dense and slow despite the fact that it is barely
half past seven. He pulls his collar up around his
neck and strides down the street towards the
junction, from where he is most likely to hail a
taxi. The roads are slick with water, the grey
light shining on the mirrored pavement.
He curses inwardly as he spies the other suited
people standing on the edge of the kerb. Since
when did the whole of London begin getting up
so early? Everyone has had the same idea.
He is wondering where best to position himself
when his phone rings. It is Rupert.
‘I’m on my way in. Just trying to get a cab.’
He catches sight of a taxi with an orange light
approaching on the other side of the road, and
begins to stride towards it, hoping nobody else
has seen. A bus roars past, followed by a lorry
whose brakes squeal, deafening him to Rupert’s
words. ‘Can’t hear you, Rupe,’ he yells against
the noise of the traffic. ‘You’ll have to say that
again.’ Briefly marooned on the island, the
traffic flowing past him like a current, he can see
the orange light glowing, holds up his free hand,
hoping that the driver can see him through the
heavy rain.
‘You need to call Jeff in New York. He’s still
up, waiting for you. We were trying to get you
last night.’
‘What’s the problem?’
‘Legal hitch. Two clauses they’re stalling on
under section … signature … papers … ’ His
voice is drowned out by a passing car, its tyres
hissing in the wet.
‘I didn’t catch that.’
The taxi has seen him. It is slowing, sending a
fine spray of water as it slows on the opposite
side of the road. He spies the man further along
whose brief sprint slows in disappointment as he
sees Will must get there before him. He feels a
sneaking sense of triumph. ‘Look, get Cally to
have the paperwork on my desk,’ he yells. ‘I’ll
be there in ten minutes.’
He glances both ways then ducks his head as
he runs the last few steps across the road towards
the cab, the word ‘Blackfriars’ already on his
lips. The rain is seeping down the gap between
his collar and his shirt. He will be soaked by the
time he reaches the office, even walking this
short distance. He may have to send his secretary
out for another shirt.
‘And we need to get this due diligence thing
worked out before Martin gets in –’
He glances up at the screeching sound, the
rude blare of a horn. He sees the side of the
glossy black taxi in front of him, the driver
already winding down his window, and at the
edge of his field of vision something he can’t
quite make out, something coming towards him
at an impossible speed.
He turns towards it, and in that split second he
realizes that he is in its path, that there is no way
he is going to be able to get out of its way. His
hand opens in surprise, letting the BlackBerry
fall to the ground. He hears a shout, which may
be his own. The last thing he sees is a leather
glove, a face under a helmet, the shock in the
man’s eyes mirroring his own. There is an explosion
as everything fragments.
And then there is nothing.There are 158 footsteps between the bus stop and
home, but it can stretch to 180 if you aren’t in a
hurry, like maybe if you’re wearing platform
shoes. Or shoes you bought from a charity shop
that have butterflies on the toes but never quite
grip the heel at the back, thereby explaining why
they were a knock-down £1.99. I turned the
corner into our street (68 steps), and could just see
the house – a four-bedroomed semi in a row of
other three- and four-bedroomed semis. Dad’s car
was outside, which meant he had not yet left for
work.
Behind me, the sun was setting behind Stortfold
Castle, its dark shadow sliding down the hill
like melting wax to overtake me. When I was a
child we used to make our elongated shadows
have gun battles, our street the O. K. Corral. On
a different sort of day, I could have told you all
the things that had happened to me on this route:
where Dad taught me to ride a bike without stabilizers;
where Mrs Doherty with the lopsided
wig used to make us Welsh cakes; where Treena
stuck her hand into a hedge when she was eleven
and disturbed a wasp’s nest and we ran screaming
all the way back to the castle.
Thomas’s tricycle was upturned on the path
and, closing the gate behind me, I dragged it under
the porch and opened the door. The warmth
hit me with the force of an air bag; Mum is a
martyr to the cold and keeps the heating on all
year round. Dad is always opening windows,
complaining that she’d bankrupt the lot of us. He
says our heating bills are larger than the GDP of
a small African country.
‘That you, love?’
‘Yup.’ I hung my jacket on the peg, where it
fought for space amongst the others.
‘Which you? Lou? Treena?’
‘Lou.’
I peered round the living-room door. Dad was
face down on the sofa, his arm thrust deep
between the cushions, as if they had swallowed
his limb whole. Thomas, my five-year-old nephew,
was on his haunches, watching him intently.
‘Lego.’ Dad turned his face towards me, puce
from exertion. ‘Why they have to make the
damned pieces so small I don’t know. Have you
seen Obi-Wan Kenobi’s left arm?’
‘It was on top of the DVD player. I think he
swapped Obi’s arms with Indiana Jones’s.’
‘Well, apparently now Obi can’t possibly have
beige arms. We have to have the black arms.’
‘I wouldn’t worry. Doesn’t Darth Vader chop
his arm off in episode two?’ I pointed at my
cheek so that Thomas would kiss it. ‘Where’s
Mum?’
‘Upstairs. How about that? A two-pound
piece!’
I looked up, just able to hear the familiar creak
of the ironing board. Josie Clark, my mother,
never sat down. It was a point of honour. She
had been known to stand on an outside ladder
painting the windows, occasionally pausing to
wave, while the rest of us ate a roast dinner.
‘Will you have a go at finding this bloody arm
for me? He’s had me looking for half an hour
and I’ve got to get ready for work.’
‘Are you on nights?’
‘Yeah. It’s half five.’
I glanced at the clock. ‘Actually, it’s half
four.’
He extracted his arm from the cushions and
squinted at his watch. ‘Then what are you doing
home so early?’
I shook my head vaguely, as if I might have
misunderstood the question, and walked into the
kitchen.
Granddad was sitting in his chair by the kitchen
window, studying a sudoku. The health visitor
had told us it would be good for his concentration,
help his focus after the strokes. I suspected
I was the only one to notice he simply filled
out all the boxes with whatever number came to
mind.
‘Hey, Granddad.’
He looked up and smiled.
‘You want a cup of tea?’
He shook his head, and partially opened his
mouth.
‘Cold drink?’
He nodded.
I opened the fridge door. ‘There’s no apple
juice.’ Apple juice, I remembered now, was too
expensive. ‘Ribena?’
He shook his head.
‘Water?’
He nodded, murmured something that could
have been a thank you as I handed him the glass.
My mother walked into the room, bearing a
huge basket of neatly folded laundry. ‘Are these
yours?’ She brandished a pair of socks.
‘Treena’s, I think.’
‘I thought so. Odd colour. I think they must
have got in with Daddy’s plum pyjamas. You’re
back early. Are you going somewhere?’
‘No.’ I filled a glass with tap water and drank
it.
‘Is Patrick coming round later? He rang here
earlier. Did you have your mobile off?’
‘Mm.’
‘He said he’s after booking your holiday.
Your father says he saw something on the television
about it. Where is it you liked? Ipsos?
Kalypsos?’
‘Skiathos.’
‘That’s the one. You want to check your hotel
very carefully. Do it on the internet. He and
Daddy watched something on the news at lunchtime.
Apparently they’re building sites, half of
those budget deals, and you wouldn’t know until
you got there. Daddy, would you like a cup of
tea? Did Lou not offer you one?’ She put the
kettle on then glanced up at me. It’s possible she
had finally noticed I wasn’t saying anything.
‘Are you all right, love? You look awfully pale.’
She reached out a hand and felt my forehead,
as if I were much younger than twenty-six.
‘I don’t think we’re going on holiday.’
My mother’s hand stilled. Her gaze had that
X-ray thing that it had held since I was a kid.
‘Are you and Pat having some problems?’
‘Mum, I –’
‘I’m not trying to interfere. It’s just, you’ve
been together an awful long time. It’s only natural
if things get a bit sticky every now and then. I
mean, me and your father we –’
‘I lost my job.’
My voice cut into the silence. The words hung
there, searing themselves on the little room long
after the sound had died away.
‘You what?’
‘Frank’s shutting down the cafe. From tomorrow.’
I held out a hand with the slightly damp
envelope I had gripped in shock the entire journey
home. All 180 steps from the bus stop. ‘He’s
given me my three months’ money.’
The day had started like any other day. Everyone
I knew hated Monday mornings, but I never
minded them. I liked arriving early at The
Buttered Bun, firing up the huge tea urn in the
corner, bringing in the crates of milk and bread
from the backyard and chatting to Frank as we
prepared to open.
I liked the fuggy bacon-scented warmth of the
cafe, the little bursts of cool air as the door
opened and closed, the low murmur of conversation
and, when quiet, Frank’s radio singing tinnily
to itself in the corner. It wasn’t a fashionable
place – its walls were covered in scenes from the
castle up on the hill, the tables still sported
Formica tops, and the menu hadn’t altered since
I started, apart from a few changes to the chocolate
bar selection and the addition of chocolate
brownies and muffins to the iced bun tray.
But most of all I liked the customers. I liked
Kev and Angelo, the plumbers, who came in
most mornings and teased Frank about where his
meat might have come from. I liked the Dandelion
Lady, nicknamed for her shock of white hair,
who ate one egg and chips from Monday to
Thursday and sat reading the complimentary
newspapers and drinking her way through two
cups of tea. I always made an effort to chat with
her. I suspected it might be the only conversation
the old woman got all day.
I liked the tourists, who stopped on their walk
up and down from the castle, the shrieking
schoolchildren, who stopped by after school, the
regulars from the offices across the road, and
Nina and Cherie, the hairdressers, who knew the
calorie count of every single item The Buttered
Bun had to offer. Even the annoying customers,
like the red-haired woman who ran the toyshop
and disputed her change at least once a week,
didn’t trouble me.
I watched relationships begin and end across
those tables, children transferred between divorcees,
the guilty relief of those parents who
couldn’t face cooking, and the secret pleasure of
pensioners at a fried breakfast. All human life
came through, and most of them shared a few
words with me, trading jokes or comments over
the mugs of steaming tea. Dad always said he
never knew what was going to come out of my
mouth next, but in the cafe it didn’t matter.
Frank liked me. He was quiet by nature, and
said having me there kept the place lively. It was
a bit like being a barmaid, but without the hassle
of drunks.
And then that afternoon, after the lunchtime
rush had ended, and with the place briefly
empty, Frank, wiping his hands on his apron,
had come out from behind the hotplate and
turned the little Closed sign to face the street.
‘Now now, Frank, I’ve told you before. Extras
are not included in the minimum wage.’ Frank
was, as Dad put it, as queer as a blue gnu. I
looked up.
He wasn’t smiling.
‘Uh-oh. I didn’t put salt in the sugar cellars
again, did I?’
He was twisting a tea towel between his two
hands and looked more uncomfortable than I had
ever seen him. I wondered, briefly, whether
someone had complained about me. And then he
motioned to me to sit down.
‘Sorry, Louisa,’ he said, after he had told me.
‘But I’m going back to Australia. My Dad’s not
too good, and it looks like the castle is definitely
going to start doing its own refreshments. The
writing’s on the wall.’
I think I sat there with my mouth actually
hanging open. And then Frank had handed me
the envelope, and answered my next question before
it left my lips. ‘I know we never had, you
know, a formal contract or anything, but I
wanted to look after you. There’s three months’
money in there. We close tomorrow.’
‘Three months!’ Dad exploded, as my mother
thrust a cup of sweet tea into my hands. ‘Well,
that’s big of him, given she’s worked like a
ruddy Trojan in that place for the last six years.’
‘Bernard.’ Mum shot him a warning look,
nodding towards Thomas. My parents minded
him after school every day until Treena finished
work.
‘What the hell is she supposed to do now? He
could have given her more than a day’s bloody
notice.’
‘Well … she’ll just have to get another job.’
‘There are no bloody jobs, Josie. You know
that as well as I do. We’re in the middle of a
bloody recession.’
Mum shut her eyes for a moment, as if composing
herself before she spoke. ‘She’s a bright
girl. She’ll find herself something. She’s got a
solid employment record, hasn’t she? Frank will
give her a good reference.’
‘Oh, fecking marvellous … “Louisa Clark is
very good at buttering toast, and a dab hand with
the old teapot.”’
‘Thanks for the vote of confidence, Dad.’
‘I’m just saying.’
I knew the real reason for Dad’s anxiety. They
relied on my wages. Treena earned next to nothing
at the flower shop. Mum couldn’t work, as
she had to look after Granddad, and Granddad’s
pension amounted to almost nothing. Dad lived
in a constant state of anxiety about his job at the
furniture factory. His boss had been muttering
about possible redundancies for months. There
were murmurings at home about debts and the
juggling of credit cards. Dad had had his car
written off by an uninsured driver two years previously,
and somehow this had been enough for
the whole teetering edifice that was my parents’
finances to finally collapse. My modest wages
had been a little bedrock of housekeeping
money, enough to help see the family through
from week to week.
‘Let’s not get ahead of ourselves. She can
head down to the Job Centre tomorrow and see
what’s on offer. She’s got enough to get by for
now.’ They spoke as if I weren’t there. ‘And
she’s smart. You’re smart, aren’t you, love? Perhaps
she could do a typing course. Go into office
work.’
I sat there, as my parents discussed what other
jobs my limited qualifications might entitle me
to. Factory work, machinist, roll butterer. For the
first time that afternoon I wanted to cry. Thomas
watched me with big, round eyes, and silently
handed me half a soggy biscuit.
‘Thanks, Tommo,’ I mouthed silently, and ate
it.
He was down at the athletics club, as I had
known he would be. Mondays to Thursdays, regular
as a station timetable, Patrick was there in
the gym or running in circles around the floodlit
track. I made my way down the steps, hugging
myself against the cold, and walked slowly out
on to the track, waving as he came close enough
to see who it was.
‘Run with me,’ he puffed, as he got closer. His
breath came in pale clouds. ‘I’ve got four laps to
go.’
I hesitated just a moment, and then began to
run alongside him. It was the only way I was going
to get any kind of conversation out of him. I
was wearing my pink trainers with the turquoise
laces, the only shoes I could possibly run in.
I had spent the day at home, trying to be useful.
I’m guessing it was about an hour before I
started to get under my mother’s feet. Mum and
Granddad had their routines, and having me
there interrupted them. Dad was asleep, as he
was on nights this month, and not to be disturbed.
I tidied my room, then sat and watched
television with the sound down and when I remembered,
periodically, why I was at home in
the middle of the day I had felt an actual brief
pain in my chest.
‘I wasn’t expecting you.’
‘I got fed up at home. I thought maybe we
could do something.’
He looked sideways at me. There was a fine
film of sweat on his face. ‘The sooner you get
another job, babe, the better.’
‘It’s all of twenty-four hours since I lost the
last one. Am I allowed to just be a bit miserable
and floppy? You know, just for today?’
‘But you’ve got to look at the positive side.
You knew you couldn’t stay at that place
forever. You want to move upwards, onwards.’
Patrick had been named Stortfold Young Entrepreneur
of the Year two years previously, and
had not yet quite recovered from the honour. He
had since acquired a business partner, Ginger
Pete, offering personal training to clients over a
40-mile area, and two liveried vans on the HP.
He also had a whiteboard in his office, on which
he liked to scrawl his projected turnover with
thick black markers, working and reworking the
figures until they met with his satisfaction. I was
never entirely sure that they bore any resemblance
to real life.
‘Being made redundant can change people’s
lives, Lou.’ He glanced at his watch, checking
his lap time. ‘What do you want to do? You
could retrain. I’m sure they do a grant for people
like you.’
‘People like me?’
‘People looking for a new opportunity. What
do you want to be? You could be a beautician.
You’re pretty enough.’ He nudged me as we ran,
as if I should be grateful for the compliment.
‘You know my beauty routine. Soap, water,
the odd paper bag.’
Patrick was beginning to look exasperated.
I was starting to lag behind. I hate running. I
hated him for not slowing down.
‘Look … shop assistant. Secretary. Estate
agent. I don’t know … there must be something
you want to do.’
But there wasn’t. I had liked it in the cafe. I
liked knowing everything there was to know
about The Buttered Bun, and hearing about the
lives of the people who came through it. I had
felt comfortable there.
‘You can’t mope around, babe. Got to get over
it. All the best entrepreneurs fight their way back
from rock bottom. Jeffrey Archer did it. So did
Richard Branson.’ He tapped my arm, trying to
get me to keep up.
‘I doubt if Jeffrey Archer ever got made redundant
from toasting teacakes.’ I was out of
breath. And I was wearing the wrong bra. I
slowed, dropped my hands down on to my
knees.
He turned, running backwards, his voice carrying
on the still, cold air. ‘But if he had … I’m
just saying. Sleep on it, put on a smart suit and
head down to the Job Centre. Or I’ll train you up
to work with me, if you like. You know there’s
money in it. And don’t worry about the holiday.
I’ll pay.’
I smiled at him.
He blew a kiss and his voice echoed across the
empty stadium. ‘You can pay me back when
you’re back on your feet.’
I made my first claim for Jobseeker’s Allowance.
I attended a 45-minute interview, and a
group interview, where I sat with a group of
twenty or so mismatched men and women, half
of whom wore the same slightly stunned expression
I suspected I did, and the other half the
blank, uninterested faces of people who had been
here too many times before. I wore what my Dad
deemed my ‘civilian’ clothes.
As a result of these efforts, I had endured a
brief stint filling in on a night shift at a chicken
processing factory (it had given me nightmares
for weeks), and two days at a training session as
a Home Energy Adviser. I had realized pretty
quickly that I was essentially being instructed to
befuddle old people into switching energy suppliers,
and told Syed, my personal ‘adviser’ that
I couldn’t do it. He had been insistent that I continue,
so I had listed some of the practices that
they had asked me to employ, at which point he
had gone a bit quiet and suggested we (it was always
‘we’ even though it was pretty obvious that
one of us had a job) try something else.
I did two weeks at a fast food chain. The
hours were okay, I could cope with the fact that
the uniform made my hair static, but I found it
impossible to stick to the ‘appropriate responses’
script, with its ‘How can I help you today?’ and
its ‘Would you like large fries with that?’ I had
been let go after one of the doughnut girls caught
me debating the varying merits of the free toys
with a four-year-old. What can I say? She was a
smart four-year-old. I also thought the Sleeping
Beauties were sappy.
Now I sat at my fourth interview as Syed
scanned through the touch screen for further employment
‘opportunities’. Even Syed, who wore
the grimly cheerful demeanour of someone who
had shoehorned the most unlikely candidates into
a job, was starting to sound a little weary.
‘Um … Have you ever considered joining the
entertainment industry?’
‘What, as in pantomime dame?’
‘Actually, no. But there is an opening for a
pole dancer. Several, in fact.’
I raised an eyebrow. ‘Please tell me you are
kidding.’
‘It’s thirty hours a week on a self-employed
basis. I believe the tips are good.’
‘Please, please tell me you have not just advised
me to get a job that involves parading
around in front of strangers in my underwear.’
‘You said you were good with people. And
you seem to like … theatrical … clothing.’ He
glanced at my tights, which were green and glittery.
I had thought they would cheer me up. Thomas
had hummed the theme tune from The Little
Mermaid at me for almost the whole of breakfast.
Syed tapped something into his keyboard.
‘How about “adult chat line supervisor”?’
I stared at him.
He shrugged. ‘You said you liked talking to
people.’
‘No. And no to semi-nude bar staff. Or masseuse.
Or webcam operator. Come on, Syed.
There must be something I can do that wouldn’t
actually give my dad a heart attack.’
This appeared to stump him. ‘There’s not
much left outside flexi-hour retail opportunities.’
‘Night-time shelf stacking?’ I had been here
enough times now to speak their language.
‘There’s a waiting list. Parents tend to go for
it, because it suits the school hours,’ he said apologetically.
He studied the screen again. ‘So
we’re really left with care assistant.’
‘Wiping old people’s bottoms.’
‘I’m afraid, Louisa, you’re not qualified for
much else. If you wanted to retrain, I’d be happy
to point you in the right direction. There are
plenty of courses at the adult education centre.’
‘But we’ve been through this, Syed. If I do
that, I lose my Jobseeker money, right?’
‘If you’re not available for work, yes.’
We sat there in silence for a moment. I gazed
at the doors, where two burly security men
stood. I wondered if they had got the job through
the Job Centre.
‘I’m not good with old people, Syed. My
granddad lives at home since he had his strokes,
and I can’t cope with him.’
‘Ah. So you have some experience of caring.’
‘Not really. My mum does everything for
him.’
‘Would your mum like a job?’
‘Funny.’
‘I’m not being funny.’
‘And leave me looking after my granddad? No
thanks. That’s from him, as well as me, by the
way. Haven’t you got anything in any cafes?’
‘I don’t think there are enough cafes left to
guarantee you employment, Louisa. We could
try Kentucky Fried Chicken. You might get on
better there.’
‘Because I’d get so much more out of offering
a Bargain Bucket than a Chicken McNugget? I
don’t think so.’
‘Well, then perhaps we’ll have to look further
afield.’
‘There are only four buses to and from our
town. You know that. And I know you said I
should look into the tourist bus, but I rang the
station and it stops at 5pm. Plus it’s twice as expensive
as the normal bus.’
Syed sat back in his seat. ‘At this point in proceedings,
Louisa, I really need to make the point
that as a fit and able person, in order to continue
qualifying for your allowance, you need –’
‘– to show that I’m trying to get a job. I
know.’
How could I explain to this man how much I
wanted to work? Did he have the slightest idea
how much I missed my old job? Unemployment
had been a concept, something droningly referred
to on the news in relation to shipyards or
car factories. I had never considered that you
might miss a job like you missed a limb – a constant,
reflexive thing. I hadn’t thought that as
well as the obvious fears about money, and your
future, losing your job would make you feel inadequate,
and a bit useless. That it would be
harder to get up in the morning than when you
were rudely shocked into consciousness by the
alarm. That you might miss the people you
worked with, no matter how little you had in
common with them. Or even that you might find
yourself searching for familiar faces as you
walked the high street. The first time I had seen
the Dandelion Lady wandering past the shops,
looking as aimless as I felt, I had fought the urge
to go and give her a hug.
Syed’s voice broke into my reverie. ‘Aha.
Now this might work.’
I tried to peer round at the screen.
‘Just come in. This very minute. Care assistant
position.’
‘I told you I was no good with –’
‘It’s not old people. It’s a … a private position.
To help in someone’s house, and the address
is less than two miles from your home.
“Care and companionship for a disabled man.”
Can you drive?’
‘Yes. But would I have to wipe his –’
‘No bottom wiping required, as far as I can
tell.’ He scanned the screen. ‘He’s a … a quadriplegic.
He needs someone in the daylight hours
to help feed and assist. Often in these jobs it’s a
case of being there when they want to go out
somewhere, helping with basic stuff that they
can’t do themselves. Oh. It’s good money. Quite
a lot more than the minimum wage.’
‘That’s probably because it involves bottom
wiping.’
‘I’ll ring them to confirm the absence of bottom
wiping. But if that’s the case, you’ll go
along for the interview?’
He said it like it was a question.
But we both knew the answer.
I sighed, and gathered up my bag ready for the
trip home.
‘Jesus Christ,’ said my father. ‘Can you imagine?
If it wasn’t punishment enough ending up
in a ruddy wheelchair, then you get our Lou
turning up to keep you company.’
‘Bernard!’ my mother scolded.
Behind me, Granddad was laughing into his
mug of tea.I am not thick. I’d just like to get that out of the
way at this point. But it’s quite hard not to feel a
bit deficient in the Department of Brain Cells,
growing up next to a younger sister who was not
just moved up a year into my class, but then to the
year above.
Everything that is sensible, or smart, Katrina
did first, despite being eighteen months younger
than me. Every book I ever read she had read
first, every fact I mentioned at the dinner table she
already knew. She is the only person I know who
actually likes exams. Sometimes I think I dress
the way I do because the one thing Treena can’t
do is put clothes together. She’s a pullover and
jeans kind of a girl. Her idea of smart is ironing
the jeans first.
My father calls me a ‘character’, because I
tend to say the first thing that pops into my head.
He says I’m like my Aunt Lily, who I never
knew. It’s a bit weird, constantly being compared
to someone you’ve never met. I would
come downstairs in purple boots, and Dad would
nod at Mum and say, ‘D’you remember Aunt
Lily and her purple boots, eh?’ and Mum would
cluck and start laughing as if at some secret joke.
My mother calls me ‘individual’, which is her
polite way of not quite understanding the way I
dress.
But apart from a brief period in my teens, I
never wanted to look like Treena, or any of the
girls at school; I preferred boys’ clothes till I was
about fourteen, and now tend to please myself –
depending on what mood I am in on the day.
There’s no point me trying to look conventional.
I am small, dark-haired and, according to my
dad, have the face of an elf. That’s not as in
‘elfin beauty’. I am not plain, but I don’t think
anyone is ever going to call me beautiful. I don’t
have that graceful thing going on. Patrick calls
me gorgeous when he wants to get his leg over,
but he’s fairly transparent like that. We’ve
known each other for coming up to seven years.
I was twenty-six years old and I wasn’t really
sure what I was. Up until I lost my job I hadn’t
even given it any thought. I supposed I would
probably marry Patrick, knock out a few kids,
live a few streets away from where I had always
lived. Apart from an exotic taste in clothes, and
the fact that I’m a bit short, there’s not a lot separating
me from anyone you might pass in the
street. You probably wouldn’t look at me twice.
An ordinary girl, leading an ordinary life. It actually
suited me fine.
‘You must wear a suit to an interview,’ Mum
had insisted. ‘Everyone’s far too casual these
days.’
‘Because wearing pinstripes will be vital if
I’m spoon-feeding a geriatric.’
‘Don’t be smart.’
‘I can’t afford to buy a suit. What if I don’t get
the job?’
‘You can wear mine, and I’ll iron you a nice
blouse, and just for once don’t wear your hair up
in those –’ she gestured to my hair, which was
normally twisted into two dark knots on each
side of my head ‘– Princess Leia things. Just try
to look like a normal person.’
I knew better than to argue with my mother.
And I could tell Dad had been instructed not to
comment on my outfit as I walked out of the
house, my gait awkward in the too-tight skirt.
‘Bye love,’ he said, the corners of his mouth
twitching. ‘Good luck now. You look
very … businesslike.’
The embarrassing thing was not that I was
wearing my mother’s suit, or that it was in a cut
last fashionable in the late 1980s, but that it was
actually a tiny bit small for me. I felt the waistband
cutting into my midriff, and pulled the
double-breasted jacket across. As Dad says of
Mum, there’s more fat on a kirby grip.
I sat through the short bus journey feeling
faintly sick. I had never had a proper job interview.
I had joined The Buttered Bun after
Treena bet me that I couldn’t get a job in a day. I
had walked in and simply asked Frank if he
needed a spare pair of hands. It had been his first
day open and he had looked almost blinded by
gratitude.
Now, looking back, I couldn’t even remember
having a discussion with him about money. He
suggested a weekly wage, I agreed, and once a
year he told me he’d upped it a bit, usually by a
little more than I would have asked for.
What did people ask in interviews anyway?
And what if they asked me to do something
practical with this old man, to feed him or bath
him or something? Syed had said there was a
male carer who covered his ‘intimate needs’ (I
shuddered at the phrase). The secondary carer’s
job was, he said, ‘a little unclear at this point’. I
pictured myself wiping drool from the old man’s
mouth, maybe asking loudly, ‘DID HE WANT
A CUP OF TEA?’
When Granddad had first begun his recovery
from his strokes he hadn’t been able to do anything
for himself. Mum had done it all. ‘Your
mother is a saint,’ Dad said, which I took to
mean that she wiped his bum without running
screaming from the house. I was pretty sure
nobody had ever described me as such. I cut
Granddad’s food up for him and made him cups
of tea but as for anything else, I wasn’t sure I
was made of the right ingredients.
Granta House was on the other side of Stortfold
Castle, close to the medieval walls, on the
long unpavemented stretch that comprised only
four houses and the National Trust shop, bang in
the middle of the tourist area. I had passed this
house a million times in my life without ever actually
properly seeing it. Now, walking past the
car park and the miniature railway, both of
which were empty and as bleak as only a summer
attraction can look in February, I saw it was
bigger than I had imagined, red brick with a
double front, the kind of house you saw in old
copies of Country Life while waiting at the doctor’s.
I walked up the long drive, trying not to think
about whether anybody was watching out of the
window. Walking up a long drive puts you at a
disadvantage; it automatically makes you feel inferior.
I was just contemplating whether to actually
tug at my forelock, when the door opened
and I jumped.
A woman, not much older than me, stepped
out into the porch. She was wearing white slacks
and a medical-looking tunic and carried a coat
and a folder under her arm. As she passed me
she gave a polite smile.
‘And thank you so much for coming,’ a voice
said, from inside. ‘We’ll be in touch. Ah.’ A woman’s
face appeared, middle-aged but beautiful,
under expensive precision-cut hair. She was
wearing a trouser suit that I guessed cost more
than my dad earned in a month.
‘You must be Miss Clark.’
‘Louisa.’ I shot out a hand, as my mother had
impressed upon me to do. The young people
never offered up a hand these days, my parents
had agreed. In the old days you wouldn’t have
dreamt of a ‘hiya’ or, worse, an air kiss. This
woman did not look like she would have welcomed
an air kiss.
‘Right. Yes. Do come in.’ She withdrew her
hand from mine as soon as humanly possible,
but I felt her eyes linger upon me, as if she were
already assessing me.
‘Would you like to come through? We’ll talk
in the drawing room. My name is Camilla
Traynor.’ She seemed weary, as if she had
uttered the same words many times that day
already.
I followed her through to a huge room with
floor to ceiling French windows. Heavy curtains
draped elegantly from fat mahogany curtain
poles, and the floors were carpeted with intricately
decorated Persian rugs. It smelt of beeswax
and antique furniture. There were little elegant
side tables everywhere, their burnished surfaces
covered with ornamental boxes. I wondered
briefly where on earth the Traynors put their
cups of tea.
‘So you have come via the Job Centre advertisement,
is that right? Do sit down.’
While she flicked through her folder of papers,
I gazed surreptitiously around the room. I
had thought the house might be a bit like a care
home, all hoists and wipe-clean surfaces. But
this was like one of those scarily expensive hotels,
steeped in old money, with well-loved
things that looked valuable in their own right.
There were silver-framed photographs on a sideboard,
but they were too far away for me to
make out the faces. As she scanned her pages, I
shifted in my seat, to try to get a better look.
And it was then that I heard it – the unmistakable
sound of stitches ripping. I glanced down to
see the two pieces of material that joined at the
side of my right leg had torn apart, sending
frayed pieces of silk thread shooting upwards in
an ungainly fringe. I felt my face flood with colour.
‘So … Miss Clark …do you have any experience
with quadriplegia?’
I turned to face Mrs Traynor, wriggling so that
my jacket covered as much of the skirt as possible.
‘No.’
‘Have you been a carer for long?’
‘Um … I’ve never actually done it,’ I said,
adding, as if I could hear Syed’s voice in my ear,
‘but I’m sure I could learn.’
‘Do you know what a quadriplegic is?’
I faltered. ‘When … you’re stuck in a wheelchair?’
‘I suppose that’s one way of putting it. There
are varying degrees, but in this case we are talking
about complete loss of use of the legs, and
very limited use of the hands and arms. Would
that bother you?’
‘Well, not as much as it would bother him, obviously.’
I raised a smile, but Mrs Traynor’s face
was expressionless. ‘Sorry – I didn’t mean –’
‘Can you drive, Miss Clark?’
‘Yes.’
‘Clean licence?’
I nodded.
Camilla Traynor ticked something on her list.
The rip was growing. I could see it creeping
inexorably up my thigh. At this rate, by the time
I stood up I would look like a Vegas showgirl.
‘Are you all right?’ Mrs Traynor was gazing
at me.
‘I’m just a little warm. Do you mind if I take
my jacket off?’ Before she could say anything, I
wrenched the jacket off in one fluid motion and
tied it around my waist, obscuring the split in the
skirt. ‘So hot,’ I said, smiling at her, ‘coming in
from outside. You know.’
There was the faintest pause, and then Mrs
Traynor looked back at her folder. ‘How old are
you?’
‘I’m twenty-six.’
‘And you were in your previous job for six
years.’
‘Yes. You should have a copy of my reference.’
‘Mm … ’ Mrs Traynor held it up and squinted.
‘Your previous employer says you are a
“warm, chatty and life-enhancing presence”.’
‘Yes, I paid him.’
That poker face again.
Oh hell, I thought.
It was as if I were being studied. Not necessarily
in a good way. My mother’s shirt felt suddenly
cheap, the synthetic threads shining in the
thin light. I should just have worn my plainest
trousers and a shirt. Anything but this suit.
‘So why are you leaving this job, where you
are clearly so well regarded?’
‘Frank – the owner – sold the cafe. It’s the one
at the bottom of the castle. The Buttered Bun.
Was,’ I corrected myself. ‘I would have been
happy to stay.’
Mrs Traynor nodded, either because she didn’t
feel the need to say anything further about it, or
because she too would have been happy for me
to stay there.
‘And what exactly do you want to do with
your life?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘Do you have aspirations for a career? Would
this be a stepping stone to something else? Do
you have a professional dream that you wish to
pursue?’
I looked at her blankly.
Was this some kind of trick question?
‘I … I haven’t really thought that far. Since I
lost my job. I just –’ I swallowed. ‘I just want to
work again.’
It sounded feeble. What kind of person came
to an interview without even knowing what she
wanted to do? Mrs Traynor’s expression suggested
she thought the same thing.
She put down her pen. ‘So, Miss Clark, why
should I employ you instead of, say, the previous
candidate, who has several years’ experience
with quadriplegics?’
I looked at her. ‘Um …honestly? I don’t
know.’ This met with silence, so I added, ‘I
guess that would be your call.’
‘You can’t give me a single reason why I
should employ you?’
My mother’s face suddenly swam into view.
The thought of going home with a ruined suit
and another interview failure was beyond me.
And this job paid more than £9 an hour.
I sat up a bit. ‘Well … I’m a fast learner, I’m
never ill, I only live on the other side of the
castle, and I’m stronger than I look … probably
strong enough to help move your husband
around –’
‘My husband? It’s not my husband you’d be
working with. It’s my son.’
‘Your son?’ I blinked. ‘Um … I’m not afraid
of hard work. I’m good at dealing with all sorts
of people and … and I make a mean cup of tea.’
I began to blather into the silence. The thought
of it being her son had thrown me. ‘I mean, my
dad seems to think that’s not the greatest reference.
But in my experience there’s not much that
can’t be fixed by a decent cup of tea … ’
There was something a bit strange about the
way Mrs Traynor was looking at me.
‘Sorry,’ I spluttered, as I realized what I had
said. ‘I’m not suggesting the thing … the paraplegia
… quadriplegia … with … your
son … could be solved by a cup of tea.’
‘I should tell you, Miss Clark, that this is not a
permanent contract. It would be for a maximum
of six months. That is why the salary is … commensurate.
We wanted to attract the right person.’
‘Believe me, when you’ve done shifts at a
chicken processing factory, working in Guantánamo
Bay for six months looks attractive.’ Oh,
shut up, Louisa. I bit my lip.
But Mrs Traynor seemed oblivious. She
closed her file. ‘My son – Will – was injured in a
road accident almost two years ago. He requires
twenty-four-hour care, the majority of which is
provided by a trained nurse. I have recently returned
to work, and the carer would be required
to be here throughout the day to keep him company,
help him with food and drink, generally
provide an extra pair of hands, and make sure
that he comes to no harm.’ Camilla Traynor
looked down at her lap. ‘It is of the utmost importance
that Will has someone here who understands
that responsibility.’
Everything she said, even the way she emphasized
her words, seemed to hint at some stupidity
on my part.
‘I can see that.’ I began to gather up my bag.
‘So would you like the job?’
It was so unexpected that at first I thought I
had heard her wrong. ‘Sorry?’
‘We would need you to start as soon as possible.
Payment will be weekly.’
I was briefly lost for words. ‘You’d rather
have me instead of –’ I began.
‘The hours are quite lengthy – 8am till 5pm,
sometimes later. There is no lunch break as such,
although when Nathan, his daily nurse, comes in
at lunchtime to attend to him, there should be a
free half an hour.’
‘You wouldn’t need anything … medical?’
‘Will has all the medical care we can offer
him. What we want for him is somebody robust
… and upbeat. His life is … complicated,
and it is important that he is encouraged to –’
She broke off, her gaze fixed on something outside
the French windows. Finally, she turned
back to me. ‘Well, let’s just say that his mental
welfare is as important to us as his physical welfare.
Do you understand?’
‘I think so. Would I …wear a uniform?’
‘No. Definitely no uniform.’ She glanced at
my legs. ‘Although you might want to
wear … something a bit less revealing.’
I glanced down to where my jacket had shifted,
revealing a generous expanse of bare thigh.
‘It … I’m sorry. It ripped. It’s not actually mine.’
But Mrs Traynor no longer appeared to be
listening. ‘I’ll explain what needs doing when
you start. Will is not the easiest person to be
around at the moment, Miss Clark. This job is
going to be about mental attitude as much as
any … professional skills you might have. So.
We will see you tomorrow?’
‘Tomorrow? You don’t want … you don’t
want me to meet him?’
‘Will is not having a good day. I think it’s best
that we start afresh then.’
I stood up, realizing Mrs Traynor was already
waiting to see me out.
‘Yes,’ I said, tugging Mum’s jacket across me.
‘Um. Thank you. I’ll see you at eight o’clock tomorrow.’
Mum was spooning potatoes on to Dad’s plate.
She put two on, he parried, lifting a third and
fourth from the serving dish. She blocked him,
steering them back on to the serving dish, finally
rapping him on the knuckles with the serving
spoon when he made for them again. Around the
little table sat my parents, my sister and Thomas,
my granddad, and Patrick – who always came
for dinner on Wednesdays.
‘Daddy,’ Mum said to Granddad. ‘Would you
like someone to cut your meat? Treena, will you
cut Daddy’s meat?’
Treena leant across and began slicing at
Granddad’s plate with deft strokes. On the other
side she had already done the same for Thomas.
‘So how messed up is this man, Lou?’
‘Can’t be up to much if they’re willing to let
our daughter loose on him,’ Bernard remarked.
Behind me, the television was on so that Dad
and Patrick could watch the football. Every now
and then they would stop, peering round me,
their mouths stopping mid-chew as they watched
some pass or near miss.
‘I think it’s a great opportunity. She’ll be
working in one of the big houses. For a good
family. Are they posh, love?’
In our street ‘posh’ could mean anyone who
hadn’t got a family member in possession of an
ASBO.
‘I suppose so.’
‘Hope you’ve practised your curtsy.’ Dad
grinned.
‘Did you actually meet him?’ Treena leant
across to stop Thomas elbowing his juice on to
the floor. ‘The crippled man? What was he like?’
‘I meet him tomorrow.’
‘Weird, though. You’ll be spending all day
every day with him. Nine hours. You’ll see him
more than you see Patrick.’
‘That’s not hard,’ I said.
Patrick, across the table, pretended he couldn’t
hear me.
‘Still, you won’t have to worry about the old
sexual harassment, eh?’ Dad said.
‘Bernard!’ said my mother, sharply.
‘I’m only saying what everyone’s thinking.
Probably the best boss you could find for your
girlfriend, eh, Patrick?’
Across the table, Patrick smiled. He was busy
refusing potatoes, despite Mum’s best efforts. He
was having a non-carb month, ready for a marathon
in early March.
‘You know, I was thinking, will you have to
learn sign language? I mean, if he can’t communicate,
how will you know what he wants?’
‘She didn’t say he couldn’t talk, Mum.’ I
couldn’t actually remember what Mrs Traynor
had said. I was still vaguely in shock at actually
having been given a job.
‘Maybe he talks through one of those devices.
Like that scientist bloke. The one on The
Simpsons.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas.
‘Nope,’ said Bernard.
‘Stephen Hawking,’ said Patrick.
‘That’s you, that is,’ Mum said, looking accusingly
from Thomas to Dad. She could cut
steak with that look. ‘Teaching him bad language.’
‘It is not. I don’t know where he’s getting it
from.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas, looking directly at his
grandfather.
Treena made a face. ‘I think it would freak me
out, if he talked through one of those voice
boxes. Can you imagine? Get-me-a-drink-of-water,’
she mimicked.
Bright – but not bright enough not to get herself
up the duff, as Dad occasionally muttered.
She had been the first member of our family to
go to university, until Thomas’s arrival had
caused her to drop out during her final year.
Mum and Dad still held out hopes that one day
she would bring the family a fortune. Or possibly
work in a place with a reception desk that
didn’t have a security screen around it. Either
would do.
‘Why would being in a wheelchair mean he
had to speak like a Dalek?’ I said.
‘But you’re going to have to get up close and
personal to him. At the very least you’ll have to
wipe his mouth and give him drinks and stuff.’
‘So? It’s hardly rocket science.’
‘Says the woman who used to put Thomas’s
nappy on inside out.’
‘That was once.’
‘Twice. And you only changed him three
times.’
I helped myself to green beans, trying to look
more sanguine than I felt.
But even as I had ridden the bus home, the
same thoughts had already started buzzing
around my head. What would we talk about?
What if he just stared at me, head lolling, all
day? Would I be freaked out? What if I couldn’t
understand what it was he wanted? I was legendarily
bad at caring for things; we no longer
had houseplants at home, or pets, after the disasters
that were the hamster, the stick insects and
Randolph the goldfish. And how often was that
stiff mother of his going to be around? I didn’t
like the thought of being watched all the time.
Mrs Traynor seemed like the kind of woman
whose gaze turned capable hands into fingers
and thumbs.
‘Patrick, what do you think of it all, then?’
Patrick took a long slug of water, and
shrugged.
Outside, the rain beat on the windowpanes,
just audible over the clatter of plates and cutlery.
‘It’s good money, Bernard. Better than working
nights at the chicken factory, anyway.’
There was a general murmur of agreement
around the table.
‘Well, it comes to something when the best
you can all say about my new career is that it’s
better than hauling chicken carcasses around the
inside of an aircraft hangar,’ I said.
‘Well, you could always get fit in the meantime
and go and do some of your personal training
stuff with Patrick here.’
‘Get fit. Thanks, Dad.’ I had been about to
reach for another potato, and now changed my
mind.
‘Well, why not?’ Mum looked as if she might
actually sit down – everyone paused briefly, but
no, she was up again, helping Granddad to some
gravy. ‘It might be worth bearing in mind for the
future. You’ve certainly got the gift of the gab.’
‘She has the gift of the flab.’ Dad snorted.
‘I’ve just got myself a job,’ I said. ‘Paying
more than the last one too, if you don’t mind.’
‘But it is only temporary,’ Patrick interjected.
‘Your Dad’s right. You might want to start getting
in shape while you do it. You could be a
good personal trainer, if you put in a bit of effort.’
‘I don’t want to be a personal trainer. I don’t
fancy … all that … bouncing.’ I mouthed an insult
at Patrick, who grinned.
‘What Lou wants is a job where she can put
her feet up and watch daytime telly while feeding
old Ironside there through a straw,’ said
Treena.
‘Yes. Because rearranging limp dahlias into
buckets of water requires so much physical and
mental effort, doesn’t it, Treen?’
‘We’re teasing you, love.’ Dad raised his mug
of tea. ‘It’s great that you’ve got a job. We’re
proud of you already. And I bet you, once you
slide those feet of yours under the table at the big
house those buggers won’t want to get rid of
you.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas.
‘Not me,’ said Dad, chewing, before Mum
could say a thing.