The history of economics is full of tales of forgotten forerunners, men whose work had no effect and was only rediscovered after
their main ideas had been made popular by others, of remarkable
coincidences of simultaneous discoveries, and of the peculiar fate
of individual books. But there must be few instances, in economics or
any other branch of knowledge, where the works of an author who revolutionised
the body of an already well-developed science and who has
been generally recognised to have done so, have remained so little known as those of Carl Menger. It is difficult to think of a parallel case
where a work such as the Grundsätze has exercised a lasting and persistent
influence but has yet, as a result of purely accidental circumstances,
had so extremely restricted a circulation.
There can be no doubt among competent historians that if, during
the last sixty years, the Austrian School has occupied an almost
unique position in the development of economic science, this is
entirely due to the foundations laid by this one man. The reputation
of the School in the outside world and the development of its system
at important points were due to the efforts of his brilliant followers,
Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. But it is not
unduly to detract from the merits of these writers to say that its fundamental
ideas belong fully and wholly to Carl Menger. If he had not
found these principles he might have remained comparatively
unknown, might even have shared the fate of the many brilliant men
who anticipated him and were forgotten, and almost certainly would
for a long time have remained little known outside the countries of the
German tongue. But what is common to the members of the Austrian
School, what constitutes their peculiarity and provided the foundations
for their later contributions is their acceptance of the teaching of
Carl Menger.
The independent and practically simultaneous discovery of the
principle of marginal utility by William Stanley Jevons, Carl Menger,
and Léon Walras is too well known to require retelling. The year 1871,
in which both Jevons’ Theory of Political Economy and Menger’s Grundsätze
appeared, is now generally and with justice regarded as the
beginning of the modern period in the development of economics.
Jevons had outlined his fundamental ideas nine years earlier in a lecture
(published in 1866) which, however, attracted little attention, and Walras began to publish his contribution only in 1874, but the complete
independence of the work of the three founders is quite certain.
And indeed, although their central positions, the point in their system
to which they and their contemporaries naturally attached the greatest
importance, are the same, their work is so clearly distinct in general
character and background that the most interesting problem is
really how so different routes should have led to such similar results.
To understand the intellectual background of the work of Carl
Menger, a few words on the general position of economics at that time
are required. Although the quarter of a century between about 1848,
the date of J.S. Mill’s Principles, and the emergence of the new school
saw in many ways the greatest triumphs of the classical political
economy in the applied fields, its foundations, particularly its theory of value, had become more and more discredited. Perhaps the systematic
exposition in J.S. Mill’s Principles itself, in spite or because of
his complacent satisfaction about the perfected state of the theory of
value, together with his later retractions on other essential points of
the doctrine, did as much as anything else to show the deficiencies of
the classical system. In any case, critical attacks and attempts at reconstruction
multiplied in most countries.
Nowhere, however, had the decline of the classical school of economists
been more rapid and complete than in Germany. Under the
onslaughts of the Historical School not only were the classical doctrines
completely abandoned—they had never taken very firm root in
that part of the world—but any attempt at theoretical analysis came to
be regarded with deep distrust. This was partly due to methodological
considerations. But even more it was due to an intense dislike of
the practical conclusions of the classical English School—which stood
in the way of the reforming zeal of the new group which prided itself
on the name of the “ethical school.” In England the progress of economic
theory only stagnated. In Germany a second generation of his torical economists grew up who had not only never become really
acquainted with the one well-developed system of theory that existed,
but had also learnt to regard theoretical speculations of any sort as
useless if not positively harmful.
The doctrines of the classical school were probably too much discredited
to provide a possible basis of reconstruction for those who
were still interested in problems of theory. But there were elements in
the writings of the German economists of the first half of the century
which contained the germs for a possible new development.1 One of
the reasons why the classical doctrines had never firmly established
themselves in Germany was that German economists had always
remained conscious of certain contradictions inherent in any cost or,
labour theory of value. Owing, perhaps, partly to the influence of
Condillac and other French and Italian authors of the eighteenth century
a tradition had been kept alive which refused to separate value
entirely from utility. From the early years of the century into the
‘fifties and ‘sixties a succession of writers, of whom Hermann was
probably the outstanding and most influential figure (the wholly successful
Gossen remaining unnoticed), tried to combine the ideas of
utility and scarcity into an explanation of value, often coming very near to the solution provided by Menger. It is to these speculations,
which to the more practical minds of the contemporary English economists
must have appeared useless excursions into philosophy, that
Menger owed most. A glance through the extensive footnotes in his
Grundsätze, or the author’s index which has been added to the present
edition, will show how extraordinarily wide a knowledge he possessed
of these German authors and also of the French and Italian
writers, and how small a role the writers of the classical English school
plays in comparison.
But while Menger probably surpassed all his fellow-founders of the
marginal utility doctrine in the width of his knowledge of the literature—and
only from a passionate book collector inspired by the example
of the encyclopaedic Roscher could one expect a similar knowledge
at the early age the Grundsätze was written—there are curious gaps in
the list of authors to whom he refers which go far to explain the difference
of his approach from that of Jevons and Walras.1 Particularly significant
is his apparent ignorance, at the time when he wrote the Grundsätze,
of the work of Cournot, to whom all the other founders of modern
economics, Walras, Marshall, and very possibly Jevons2, seem to
have been directly or indirectly indebted. Even more surprising, however,
is the fact that at that time Menger does not seem to have known
the work of von Thünen, which one would have expected him to find
particularly congenial. While it can be said, therefore, that he worked in
an atmosphere distinctly favourable to an analysis on utility lines, he
had nothing so definite on which to build a modern theory of price as
his fellows in the same field, all of whom came under the influence of
Cournot, to which must be added, in the case of Walras, that of Dupuit3
and, in the case of Marshall, that of von Thünen.
It is an interesting speculation to think what direction the development
of Menger’s thought would have taken if he had been
acquainted with these founders of mathematical analysis. It is a curious fact that, so far as I am aware, he has nowhere commented on the
value of mathematics as a tool of economic analysis. There is no reason
to assume that he lacked either the technical equipment or the
inclination. On the contrary, his interest in the natural sciences is
beyond doubt, and a strong bias in favour of their methods is evident
throughout his work. And the fact that his brothers, particularly
Anton, are known to have been intensely interested in mathematics,
and that his son Karl became a noted mathematician, may probably be
taken as evidence of a definite mathematical strain in the family. But
although he knew later not only the work of Jevons and Walras, but
also that of his compatriots Auspitz and Lieben, he does not even refer
to the mathematical method in any of his writings on methodology.1
Must we conclude that he felt rather sceptical about its usefulness?
Among the influences to which Menger must have been subject
during the formative period of his thought there is a complete absence
of influence of Austrian economists, for the simple reason that, in the
earlier part of the nineteenth century in Austria, there were practically
no native economists. At the universities where Menger studied, political
economy was taught as part of the law curriculum, mostly by
economists imported from Germany. And though Menger, like all the
later Austrian economists, proceeded to the degree of Doctor of Law,
there is no reason to believe that he was really stimulated by his teachers
in economics. This, however, leads us to his personal history.
Born on February 28, 1840, in Neu-Sandec, Galicia, the territory of
the present Poland, the son of a lawyer, he came from an old family of
Austrian craftsmen, musicians, civil servants and army officers, who
had, only a generation before, moved from the German parts of
Bohemia to the Eastern provinces. His mother’s father,2 a Bohemian
merchant who had made a fortune during the Napoleonic wars,bought a large estate in Western Galicia where Carl Menger spent a
great part of his boyhood, and before 1848 still saw the conditions of
semi-servitude of the peasants which, in this part of Austria had persisted
longer than in any part of Europe outside Russia. With his two
brothers, Anton, later the well-known writer on law and socialism,
author of the Right to the Whole Produce of Labour, and Carl’s colleague at
the faculty of law of the University of Vienna, and Max, in his days a
well-known Austrian parliamentarian and writer on social problems,
he went to the Universities of Vienna (1859–60) and Prague (1860–3).
After taking his doctor’s degree at the University of Cracow he devoted
himself first to journalism, writing for papers in Lemberg and later in
Vienna, on economic questions. After a few years he entered the Civil
Service in the press department of the Austrian “Ministerratspräsidium,”
an office which had always retained a very special position in the
Austrian Civil Service and attracted many men of great talent.
Wieser reports that Menger once told him that it was one of his
duties to write surveys of the state of the markets for an official newspaper,
the Wiener Zeitung, and that it was in studying the market
reports that he was struck by the glaring contrast between the traditional
theories of price and the facts which experienced practical men
considered as decisive for the determination of prices. Whether this
was really the original cause which led Menger to the study of the
determination of prices or whether, which seems more likely, it only
gave a definite direction to studies which he had been pursuing since
he had left the university, we do not know. There can be little doubt,
however, that during the years intervening between the date when he
left the university and the publication of the Grundsätze he must have
worked intensely on these problems, delaying publication until his
system was fully worked out in his mind.1
He is said to have once remarked that he wrotte the Grundsätze in a
state of morbid excitement. This can hardly mean that this book was
the product of a sudden inspiration, planned and written in great
haste. Few books can have been more carefully planned; rarely has the
first exposition of an idea been more painstakingly developed and followed
up in all its ramifications. The slender volume which appeared
early in 1871 was intended as a first, introductory part of a comprehensive
treatise. It dealt with the fundamental questions, on which he
disagreed with accepted opinion, with the exhaustiveness necessary
to satisfy the author that he was building on absolutely firm
ground. The problems treated in this “First, General Part,” as it is described on the title page, were the general conditions which led to
economic activity, value exchange, price, and money. From manuscript
notes communicated by his son more than fifty years later, in
the introduction to the second edition, we know that the second part
was to treat “interest, wages, rent, income, credit, and paper money,”
a third “applied” part the theory of production and commerce, while
a fourth part was to discuss criticism of the present economic system
and proposals for economic reform.
His main aim, as he says in the preface, was a uniform theory of
price which would explain all price phenomena and in particular also
interest, wages, and rent by one leading idea. But more than half of the
volume is devoted to matters which only prepare the way for that
main task—to the concept which gave the new school its special character,
i.e. value in its subjective, personal sense. And even this is not
reached before a thorough examination of the main concepts with
which economic analysis has to work.
The influence of the earlier German writers with their predilection
for somewhat pedantic classifications and long-winded definitions of
concepts is here clearly noticeable. But in Menger’s hands the timehonoured
“fundamental concepts” of the traditional German textbook
assume new life. Instead of a dry enumeration and definition they
become the powerful instrument of an analysis in which every step
seems to result with inevitable necessity from the preceding one. And
though Menger’s exposition still lacks many of the more impressive
phrases and elegant formulations of the writings of Böhm-Bawerk
and Wieser, it is in substance hardly inferior and in many respects definitely
superior to these later works.
It is not the purpose of the present introduction to give a connected
outline of Menger’s argument. But there are certain less known, somewhat
surprising, aspects of his treatment which deserve special mention.
The careful initial investigation of the causal relationship
between human needs and the means for their satisfaction, which
within the first few pages leads him to the now celebrated distinction
between goods of the first, second, third and higher orders, and the
now equally familiar concept of complementarity between different
goods, is typical of the particular attention which, the widespread
impression to the contrary notwithstanding, the Austrian School has
always given to the technical structure of production—an attention
which finds its clearest systematic expression in the elaborate “vorwerttheoretischer
Teil” which precedes the discussion of the theory of
value in Wieser’s late work, the Theory of Social Economy, 1914.Even more remarkable is the prominent role which the element of
time plays from the very beginning. There is a very general impres-sion that the earlier representatives of modern economics were
inclined to neglect this factor. In so far as the originators of the mathematical
exposition of modern equilibrium theory are concerned, this
impression is probably justified. Not so with Menger. To him economic
activity is essentially planning for the future, and his discussion of the
period, or rather different periods, to which human forethought
extends as regards different wants has a definitely modern ring.
It is somewhat difficult to believe now that Menger was the first to
base the distinction between free and economic goods on the idea of
scarcity. But, as he himself says, while the very concept was not
known in the English literature, the German authors who had used it
before him, and particularly Hermann, had all been trying to base the
distinction on the presence or absence of cost in the sense of effort.
But, very characteristically, while all of Menger’s analysis is grounded
on the idea of scarcity, this simple term is nowhere used. “Insufficient
quantity” or “das ökonomische Mengenverhältnis” are the very exact
but somewhat cumbersome expressions which he uses instead.
It is characteristic of his work as a whole that he attaches more
importance to a careful description of a phenomenon than to giving it
a short and fitting name. This frequently prevents his exposition from
being as effective as might have been wished. But it also protects him
against a certain one-sidedness and a tendency towards oversimplification
to which a brief formula so easily leads. The classic instance of
this is, of course, the fact that Menger did not originate—nor, so far as
I know, ever use—the term marginal utility introduced by Wieser, but
always explained value by the somewhat clumsy but precise phrase,
“the importance which concrete goods, or quantities of goods, receive
for us from the fact that we are conscious of being dependent on our
disposal over them for the satisfaction of our wants,” and describes the magnitude of this value as equal to the importance which attached
to the least important satisfaction which is secured by a single unit of
the available quantity of the commodity.
Another, perhaps less important but not insignificant instance of
Menger’s refusal to condense explanations in a single formula, occurs
even earlier in the discussion of the decreasing intensity of individual
wants with increasing satisfaction. This physiological fact, which later
under the name of “Gossen’s law of the satisfaction of wants” was to
assume a somewhat disproportionate position in the exposition of the
theory of value, and was even hailed by Wieser as Menger’s main discovery,
takes in Menger’s system the more appropriate minor position
as one of the factors which enable us to arrange the different individual
sensations of want in order of their importance. On yet another and a more interesting point in connection with the
pure theory of subjective value Menger’s views are remarkably modern.
Although he speaks occasionally of value as measurable, his exposition
makes it quite clear that by this he means no more than that the
value of any one commodity can be expressed by naming another commodity
of equal value. Of the figures which he uses to represent the
scales of utility he says expressly that they are not intended to represent
the absolute, but only the relative importance of the wants, and the very
examples he gives when he first introduces them makes it perfectly
clear that he thinks of them not as cardinal but as ordinal figures.1
Next to the general principle which enabled him to base the explanation
of value on utility the most important of Menger’s contributions
is probably the application of this principle to the case where
more than one good is required to secure the satisfaction of any want.
It is here that the painstaking analysis of the causal relationship
between goods and wants in the opening chapters and the concepts of
complementarity and of goods or different orders bears its fruits.
Even to-day it is hardly recognised that Menger answered the problem
of the distribution of the utility of a final product between the several
co-operating commodities of a higher order—the problem of
imputation as it was later called by Wieser—by a fairly developed theory
of marginal productivity. He distinguishes clearly between the
case where the proportions in which two or more factors can be used
in the production of any commodity are variable and the case where
they are fixed. He answers the problem of imputation in the first case
by saying that such quantities of the different factors as can be substituted
for each other in order to get the same additional quantity of the
product must have equal value, while in the case of fixed proportions
he points out that the value of the different factors is determined by
their utility in alternative uses.
In this first part of his book, which is devoted to the theory of subjective
value, and compares well with the later exposition by Wieser,
Böhm-Bawerk and others, there is really only one major point on
which Menger’s exposition leaves a serious gap. A theory of value
can hardly be called complete and will certainly never be quite convincing
if the role that cost of production plays in determining the
relative value of different commodities is not explicitly explained. At an early point of his exposition Menger indicates that he sees the
problem and promises a later answer. But this promise is never fulfilled
It was left to Wieser to develop what later became known as the
principle of Opportunity cost or “Wieser’s Law,” i.e. the principle that
the other uses computing for the factors will limit the quantity available
for any one line of production in such a way that the value of the
product will not fall below the sum of the value which all the factors
used in its production obtain in these competing uses.
It has sometimes been suggested that Menger and his school were
so pleased with their discovery of the principles governing value in
the economy of an individual that they were inclined to apply the
same principles in an all too rapid and over-simplified way to the
explanation of price There may be some justification for such a suggestion
so far as the works of some of Menger’s followers, particularly
the younger Wieser, are concerned. But it certainly cannot be said of
Menger’s own work. His exposition completely conforms to the rule
later so much emphasized by Böhm-Bawerk, that any satisfactory
explanation of price would have to consist of two distinct and separate
stages of which the explanation of subjective value is only the
first. It only provides the basis for an explanation of the causes and
limits of exchanges between two or more persons Menger’s arrangement
in the Grundsätze is exemplary in this respect. The chapter on
exchange which precedes that on price makes the influence of value in
the subjective sense on the objective exchange relationships quite clear
without postulating any greater degree of correspondence than is
actually justified by the assumptions.
The chapter on price itself, with its careful investigation of how the
relative valuations of the individual participants in the exchange
themselves will affect the ratios of exchange in the case of an isolated
exchange of two individuals, under conditions of monopoly and
finally under conditions of competition, is the third and probably the
least known of the main contributions of the Grundsätze. Yet it is only
in reading this chapter that one realises the essential unity of his
thought, the clear aim which directs his exposition from the beginning
to this crowning achievement.
On the final chapters, which deal with the effects of production
for a market, the technical meaning of the term “commodity” (Ware)
as distinguished from the simple “good,” their different degrees of
saleability leading up to the introduction and discussion of money,
little need be said at this point. The ideas contained here and the
fragmentary remarks on capital contained in earlier sections are the
only sections of this first work which were developed further in
his printed work later on. Although they embody contributions of lasting influence, it was mainly in their later, more elaborate exposition
that they became known.
The considerable space devoted here to the discussion of the contents
of the Grundsätze is justified by the outstanding character of this
work among Menger’s publications and, indeed, among all the books
which have laid the foundations of modern economics. It is, perhaps,
appropriate to quote in this connection the judgment of the scholar
best qualified to assess the relative merits of the different variants of
the modern school, of Knut Wicksell who was the first, and hitherto
the most successful, to combine what is best in the teaching of the different
groups. “His fame,” he says, “rests on this work and through it
his name will go down to posterity, for one can safely say that since
Ricardo’s Principles there has been no book—not even excepting
Jevon’s brilliant if rather aphoristic achievement andWalras’s unfortunately
difficult work—which has exercised such great influence on the
development of economics as Menger’s Grundsätze.”1
But the immediate reception of the book can hardly be called
encouraging. None of the reviewers in the German journals seem to
have realised the nature of its main contribution.2 At home Menger’s
attempt to obtain, on the strength of this work, a lectureship (Privatdozentur)
at the University of Vienna succeeded only after some difficulty.
He can scarcely have known that, just before he began his lectures,
there had just left the University two young men who immediately
recognised that his work provided the “Archimedian point,” as
Wieser called it, by which the existing systems of economic theory
could be lifted out of their hinges. Böhm-Bawerk and Wieser, his first
and most enthusiastic disciples, were never his direct pupils, and
their attempt to popularise Menger’s doctrines in the seminars of the
leaders of the older historical school, Knies, Roscher, and Hildebrand
was fruitless.3 But Menger gradually succeeded in gaining
considerable influence at home. Soon after his promotion to the rank of professor extraordinarius in 1873 he resigned from his position in the
prime minister’s office, to the great surprise of his chief, Prince
Auersperg, who found it difficult to understand that anybody should
want to exchange a position with prospects to satisfy the greatest ambition
for an academic career.1 But this did not yet mean Menger’s final
adieu to the world of affairs, in 1876 he was appointed one of the tutors
to the ill-fated Crown Prince Rudolph, then eighteen years of age, and
accompanied him during the next two years on his extensive travels
through the greater part of Europe, including England, Scotland, Ireland,
France and Germany. After his return he was appointed in 1879
to the chair of political economy in Vienna, and thenceforward he settled
down to the secluded and quiet life of the scholar which was to be
so characteristic of the second half of his long life.
By this time the doctrines of his first book—apart from a few short
reviews of books he had published nothing in the intervening
period—were beginning to attract wider attention. Rightly or
wrongly, with Jevons and Walras it was the mathematical form rather
than the substance of their teaching which appeared to be their main
innovation, and which contributed the chief obstacle to their acceptance.
But there were no obstacles of this sort to an understanding of
Menger’s exposition of the new theory of value. During the second
decade after the publication of the book, its influence began to extend
with great rapidity. At the same time Menger began to acquire considerable
reputation as a teacher, and to attract to his lectures and
seminars an increasing number of students, many of whom soon
became economists of considerable reputation. In addition to those
already noted, among the early members of his school his contemporaries
Emil Sax and Johann von Komorzynski, and his students
Robery Meyer, Robert Zuckerkandl, Gustav Gross, and—at a somewhat
later date—H. von Schullern-Schrattenhofen, Richard Reisch
and Richard Schüller deserve special mention.
But, while at home a definite school was forming, in Germany,
even more than in other foreign countries, economists maintained a
hostile attitude. It was at this time that the younger Historical School,
under the leadership of Schmoller, was gaining the greatest influence
in that country. The “Volkswirtschaftliche Kongress,” which had preserved
the classical tradition, was superseded by the newly founded
“Verein für Sozialpolitik,” Indeed the teaching of economic theory
was more and more excluded from German universities. Thus Menger’s work was neglected, not because the German economists
thought that he was wrong, but because they considered the kind of
analysis he attempted was useless.
Under these conditions it was only natural that Menger should
consider it more important to defend the method he had adopted
against the claims of the Historical School to possess the only appropriate
instrument of research, than to continue the work on the Grundsätze.
It is to this situation that his second great work, the Untersuchungen
über die Methode der Socialwissenschaften und der politischen
Oekonomie insbesondere is due. It is well to remember that in 1875 when
Menger started to work on that book, and even in 1883 when it was
published, the rich crop of works by his disciples which definitely
established the position of the school, had not yet begun to mature,
and that he might well have thought that it would be wasted effort to
continue while the question of principle was not decided.
In their way the Untersuchungen are hardly less an achievement
than the Grundsätze. As a polemic against the claims of the Historical
School to an exclusive right to treat economic problems the book can
hardly be surpassed. Whether the merits of its positive exposition of
the nature of theoretical analysis can be rated as high is, perhaps, not
quite certain. If this were, indeed, its main title to fame there might be
something in the suggestion occasionally heard among Menger’s
admirers that it was unfortunate that he was drawn away from his
works on the concrete problems of economics. This is not to mean that
what he said on the character of the theoretical or abstract method is
not of very great importance or that it had not very great influence.
Probably it did more than any other single book to make clear the
peculiar character of the scientific method in the social sciences, and it
had a very considerable effect on professional “methodologists”
among German philosophers. But to me, at any rate, its main interest
to the economist in our days seems to lie in the extraordinary insight
into the nature of social phenomena which is revealed incidentally in
the discussion of problems mentioned to exemplify different methods
of approach, and in the light shed by his discussion of the development
of the concepts with which the social sciences have to work. Discussions
of somewhat obsolete views, as that of the organic or perhaps
better physiological interpretation of social phenomena, give him an
opportunity for an elucidation of the origin and character of social
institutions which might, with advantage, be read by present-day
economists and sociologists.
Of the central contentions of the book only one  may be singled
out for further comment; his emphasis on the necessity of a strictly individualistic or, as he generally says, atomistic method of analysis. It
has been said of him by one of his most distinguished followers that
“he himself always remained an individualist in the sense of the classical
economists. His successors ceased to be so.” It is doubtful
whether this statement is true of more than one or two instances. But
in any case it fails signally to give Menger full credit for the method he
actually employed. What with the classical economists had remained
something of a mixture between an ethical postulate and a methodological
tool, was developed by him systematically in the latter direction.
And if emphasis on the subjective element has been fuller and
more convincing in the writings of the members of the Austrian School
than in those of any other of the founders of modern economics, this
is largely due to Menger’s brilliant vindication in this book.
Menger had failed to arouse the German economists with his first
book. But he could not complain of neglect of his second. The direct
attack on what was the only approved doctrine attracted immediate
attention and provoked, among other hostile reviews, a magisterial
rebuke from Gustav Schmoller, the head of the school—a rebuke
couched in a tone more than usually offensive.1 Menger accepted the
challenge and replied in a passionate pamphlet, Irrthümer des Historismus
in der deutschen Nationalokönomie, written in the form of letters
to a friend, in which he ruthlessly demolished Schmoller’s position.
The pamphlet adds little in substance to the Untersuchungen. But
it is the best instance of the extraordinary power and brilliance of
expression which Menger could achieve when he was engaged, not
on building up an academic and complicated argument, but on driving
home the points of a straightforward debate.
The encounter between the masters was soon imitated by their
disciples. A degree of hostility not often equalled in scientific controversy
was created. The crowning offence from the Austrian point of
view was given by Schmoller himself who, on the appearance of
Menger’s pamphlet, took the probably unprecedented step of
announcing in his journal that, although he had received a copy of the
book for review, he was unable to review it because he had immediately
returned it to the author, and reprinting the insulting letter with which the returned copy had been accompanied.
It is necessary to realise fully the passion which this controversy
aroused, and what the break with the ruling school in Germany meant to Menger and his followers, if we are to understand why the
problem of the adequate methods remained the dominating concern
of most of Menger’s later life. Schmoller, indeed, went so far as to
declare publicly that members of the “abstract” school were unfit to
fill a teaching position in a German university, and his influence was
quite sufficient to make this equivalent to a complete exclusion of all
adherents to Menger’s doctrines from academic positions in Germany.
Even thirty years after the close of the controversy Germany was still
less affected by the new ideas now triumphant elsewhere, than any
other important country in the world.
In spite of these attacks, however, in the six years from 1884 to 1889
there appeared in rapid succession the books which finally established
the reputation of the Austrian School the world over. Böhm-Bawerk,
indeed, had already in 1881 published his small but important study
on Rechte und Verhältnisse vom Standpunkt der wirtschaftlichen Güterlehre,
but it was only with the simultaneous publications of the first part of
his work on capital, the Geschichte und Kritik der Kapitalzinstheorien, and
of Wieser’s Ursprung und Haupigesetze des wirtschaftlichen Wertes in 1884
that it became apparent how powerful a support to Menger’s doctrines
had arisen in this quarter. Of these two works Wieser’s was undoubtedly
the more important for the further development of Menger’s fundamental
ideas, since it contained the essential application to the cost
phenomenon, now known as Wieser’s law of cost, to which reference
has already been made. But two years later appeared Böhm-Bawerk’s
Grundzüge einer Theorie des wirtschaftlichen Güterwertes1 which,
although it adds little except by way of casuistic elaboration to the
work of Menger and Wieser, by the great lucidity and force of its argument
has probably done more than any other single work to popularise
the marginal utility doctrine. In the year 1884 two of Menger’s
immediate pupils, V. Mataja and G. Gross, had published their interesting
books on profits, and E. Sax contributed a small but acute
study on the question of method in which he supported Menger in
his fundamental attitude but criticised him on some points of
detail.2 In 1887 Sax made his main contribution to the development
of the Austrian School by the publication of his Grundlegung der
theoretischen Staatswirtschaft, the first and most exhaustive attempt to apply the marginal utility principle to the problems of public
finance, and in the same year another of Menger’s early students,
Robert Meyer, entered the field with his investigation of the somewhat
cognate problem of the nature of income.1
But the richest crop was that of the year 1889. In this year was published
Böhm-Bawerk’s Positive Theorie des Kapitalzinses, Wieser’s
Natürlicher Wert, Zuckerkandl’s Zur Theorie des Preises, Komorzynski’s
Wert in der isolierten Wirtschaft, Sax’s Neueste Fortschritte der nationalökonomischen
Theorie, and H. von Schullern-Schrattenhofen’s Untersuchungen
über Begriff und Wesen der Grundrente.
2
Perhaps the most successful early exposition of the doctrines of
the Austrian School in a foreign language was M. Pantalconi’s Pure
Economics which appeared first in the same year.3 Of other Italian
economists L. Cossa, A. Graziani and G. Mazzola accepted most or all
of Menger’s doctrines. Similar success attended these doctrines in
Holland where the acceptance by the great Dutch economist, N.G.
Pierson, of the marginal utility doctrine in his textbook (1884–1889),
published later in English under the title Principles of Economics, had
also considerable influence. In France Ch. Gide, E. Villey, Ch. Secré-
tan and M. Block spread the new doctrine, and in the United States
S.N. Patten and Professor Richard Ely had received it with great sympathy.
Even the first edition of A. Marshall’s Principles, which
appeared in 1890, showed a considerably stronger influence of
Menger and his group than readers of the later editions of that great
work would suspect. And in the next few years Smart and Dr. Bonar,
who had already earlier shown their adherence to the school, widely
popularised the work of the Austrian School in the English-speaking world.1 But, and this brings us back to the special position of
Menger’s work, it was now not so much his writings as those of his
pupils which continuously gained in popularity. The main reason for
this was simply that Menger’s Grundsätze had for some time been out
of print and difficult to procure, and that Menger refused to permit
either a reprint or a translation. He hoped to replace it soon by a much
more elaborate “system” of economics and was, in any case, unwilling
to have the work republished without considerable revision. But
other tasks claimed his prior attention, and for years led to a continual
postponement of this plan.