When he emerges from the bathroom she is
awake, propped up against the pillows and flicking
through the travel brochures that were beside
his bed. She is wearing one of his T-shirts, and
her long hair is tousled in a way that prompts reflexive
thoughts of the previous night. He stands
there, enjoying the brief flashback, rubbing the
water from his hair with a towel.
She looks up from a brochure and pouts. She is
probably slightly too old to pout, but they’ve been
going out a short enough time for it still to be
cute.
‘Do we really have to do something that involves
trekking up mountains, or hanging over
ravines? It’s our first proper holiday together,
and there is literally not one single trip in these
that doesn’t involve either throwing yourself off
something or –’ she pretends to shudder ‘– wearing
fleece.’
She throws them down on the bed, stretches
her caramel-coloured arms above her head. Her
voice is husky, testament to their missed hours
of sleep. ‘How about a luxury spa in Bali? We
could lie around on the sand … spend hours being
pampered … long relaxing nights … ’
‘I can’t do those sorts of holidays. I need to be
doing something.’
‘Like throwing yourself out of aeroplanes.’
‘Don’t knock it till you’ve tried it.’
She pulls a face. ‘If it’s all the same to you, I
think I’ll stick with knocking it.’
His shirt is faintly damp against his skin. He
runs a comb through his hair and switches on his
mobile phone, wincing at the list of messages
that immediately pushes its way through on to
the little screen.
‘Right,’ he says. ‘Got to go. Help yourself to
breakfast.’ He leans over the bed to kiss her. She
smells warm and perfumed and deeply sexy. He
inhales the scent from the back of her hair, and
briefly loses his train of thought as she wraps her
arms around his neck, pulling him down towards
the bed.
‘Are we still going away this weekend?’
He extricates himself reluctantly. ‘Depends
what happens on this deal. It’s all a bit up in the
air at the moment. There’s still a possibility I
might have to be in New York. Nice dinner
somewhere Thursday, either way? Your choice
of restaurant.’ His motorbike leathers are on the
back of the door, and he reaches for them.
She narrows her eyes. ‘Dinner. With or
without Mr BlackBerry?’
‘What?’
‘Mr BlackBerry makes me feel like Miss
Gooseberry.’ The pout again. ‘I feel like there’s
always a third person vying for your attention.’
‘I’ll turn it on to silent.’
‘Will Traynor!’ she scolds. ‘You must have
some time when you can switch off.’
‘I turned it off last night, didn’t I?’
‘Only under extreme duress.’
He grins. ‘Is that what we’re calling it now?’
He pulls on his leathers. And Lissa’s hold on his
imagination is finally broken. He throws his motorbike
jacket over his arm, and blows her a kiss
as he leaves.
There are twenty-two messages on his Black-
Berry, the first of which came in from New York
at 3.42am. Some legal problem. He takes the lift
down to the underground car park, trying to update
himself with the night’s events.
‘Morning, Mr Traynor.’
The security guard steps out of his cubicle.
It’s weatherproof, even though down here there
is no weather to be protected from. Will sometimes
wonders what he does down here in the
small hours, staring at the closed-circuit television
and the glossy bumpers of £60,000 cars that
never get dirty.
He shoulders his way into his leather jacket.
‘What’s it like out there, Mick?’
‘Terrible. Raining cats and dogs.’
Will stops. ‘Really? Not weather for the
bike?’
Mick shakes his head. ‘No, sir. Not unless
you’ve got an inflatable attachment. Or a death
wish.’
Will stares at his bike, then peels himself out
of his leathers. No matter what Lissa thinks, he
is not a man who believes in taking unnecessary
risks. He unlocks the top box of his bike and
places the leathers inside, locking it and throwing
the keys at Mick, who catches them neatly
with one hand. ‘Stick those through my door,
will you?’
‘No problem. You want me to call a taxi for
you?’
‘No. No point both of us getting wet.’
Mick presses the button to open the automatic
grille and Will steps out, lifting a hand in thanks.
The early morning is dark and thunderous
around him, the Central London traffic already
dense and slow despite the fact that it is barely
half past seven. He pulls his collar up around his
neck and strides down the street towards the
junction, from where he is most likely to hail a
taxi. The roads are slick with water, the grey
light shining on the mirrored pavement.
He curses inwardly as he spies the other suited
people standing on the edge of the kerb. Since
when did the whole of London begin getting up
so early? Everyone has had the same idea.
He is wondering where best to position himself
when his phone rings. It is Rupert.
‘I’m on my way in. Just trying to get a cab.’
He catches sight of a taxi with an orange light
approaching on the other side of the road, and
begins to stride towards it, hoping nobody else
has seen. A bus roars past, followed by a lorry
whose brakes squeal, deafening him to Rupert’s
words. ‘Can’t hear you, Rupe,’ he yells against
the noise of the traffic. ‘You’ll have to say that
again.’ Briefly marooned on the island, the
traffic flowing past him like a current, he can see
the orange light glowing, holds up his free hand,
hoping that the driver can see him through the
heavy rain.
‘You need to call Jeff in New York. He’s still
up, waiting for you. We were trying to get you
last night.’
‘What’s the problem?’
‘Legal hitch. Two clauses they’re stalling on
under section … signature … papers … ’ His
voice is drowned out by a passing car, its tyres
hissing in the wet.
‘I didn’t catch that.’
The taxi has seen him. It is slowing, sending a
fine spray of water as it slows on the opposite
side of the road. He spies the man further along
whose brief sprint slows in disappointment as he
sees Will must get there before him. He feels a
sneaking sense of triumph. ‘Look, get Cally to
have the paperwork on my desk,’ he yells. ‘I’ll
be there in ten minutes.’
He glances both ways then ducks his head as
he runs the last few steps across the road towards
the cab, the word ‘Blackfriars’ already on his
lips. The rain is seeping down the gap between
his collar and his shirt. He will be soaked by the
time he reaches the office, even walking this
short distance. He may have to send his secretary
out for another shirt.
‘And we need to get this due diligence thing
worked out before Martin gets in –’
He glances up at the screeching sound, the
rude blare of a horn. He sees the side of the
glossy black taxi in front of him, the driver
already winding down his window, and at the
edge of his field of vision something he can’t
quite make out, something coming towards him
at an impossible speed.
He turns towards it, and in that split second he
realizes that he is in its path, that there is no way
he is going to be able to get out of its way. His
hand opens in surprise, letting the BlackBerry
fall to the ground. He hears a shout, which may
be his own. The last thing he sees is a leather
glove, a face under a helmet, the shock in the
man’s eyes mirroring his own. There is an explosion
as everything fragments.
And then there is nothing.There are 158 footsteps between the bus stop and
home, but it can stretch to 180 if you aren’t in a
hurry, like maybe if you’re wearing platform
shoes. Or shoes you bought from a charity shop
that have butterflies on the toes but never quite
grip the heel at the back, thereby explaining why
they were a knock-down £1.99. I turned the
corner into our street (68 steps), and could just see
the house – a four-bedroomed semi in a row of
other three- and four-bedroomed semis. Dad’s car
was outside, which meant he had not yet left for
work.
Behind me, the sun was setting behind Stortfold
Castle, its dark shadow sliding down the hill
like melting wax to overtake me. When I was a
child we used to make our elongated shadows
have gun battles, our street the O. K. Corral. On
a different sort of day, I could have told you all
the things that had happened to me on this route:
where Dad taught me to ride a bike without stabilizers;
where Mrs Doherty with the lopsided
wig used to make us Welsh cakes; where Treena
stuck her hand into a hedge when she was eleven
and disturbed a wasp’s nest and we ran screaming
all the way back to the castle.
Thomas’s tricycle was upturned on the path
and, closing the gate behind me, I dragged it under
the porch and opened the door. The warmth
hit me with the force of an air bag; Mum is a
martyr to the cold and keeps the heating on all
year round. Dad is always opening windows,
complaining that she’d bankrupt the lot of us. He
says our heating bills are larger than the GDP of
a small African country.
‘That you, love?’
‘Yup.’ I hung my jacket on the peg, where it
fought for space amongst the others.
‘Which you? Lou? Treena?’
‘Lou.’
I peered round the living-room door. Dad was
face down on the sofa, his arm thrust deep
between the cushions, as if they had swallowed
his limb whole. Thomas, my five-year-old nephew,
was on his haunches, watching him intently.
‘Lego.’ Dad turned his face towards me, puce
from exertion. ‘Why they have to make the
damned pieces so small I don’t know. Have you
seen Obi-Wan Kenobi’s left arm?’
‘It was on top of the DVD player. I think he
swapped Obi’s arms with Indiana Jones’s.’
‘Well, apparently now Obi can’t possibly have
beige arms. We have to have the black arms.’
‘I wouldn’t worry. Doesn’t Darth Vader chop
his arm off in episode two?’ I pointed at my
cheek so that Thomas would kiss it. ‘Where’s
Mum?’
‘Upstairs. How about that? A two-pound
piece!’
I looked up, just able to hear the familiar creak
of the ironing board. Josie Clark, my mother,
never sat down. It was a point of honour. She
had been known to stand on an outside ladder
painting the windows, occasionally pausing to
wave, while the rest of us ate a roast dinner.
‘Will you have a go at finding this bloody arm
for me? He’s had me looking for half an hour
and I’ve got to get ready for work.’
‘Are you on nights?’
‘Yeah. It’s half five.’
I glanced at the clock. ‘Actually, it’s half
four.’
He extracted his arm from the cushions and
squinted at his watch. ‘Then what are you doing
home so early?’
I shook my head vaguely, as if I might have
misunderstood the question, and walked into the
kitchen.
Granddad was sitting in his chair by the kitchen
window, studying a sudoku. The health visitor
had told us it would be good for his concentration,
help his focus after the strokes. I suspected
I was the only one to notice he simply filled
out all the boxes with whatever number came to
mind.
‘Hey, Granddad.’
He looked up and smiled.
‘You want a cup of tea?’
He shook his head, and partially opened his
mouth.
‘Cold drink?’
He nodded.
I opened the fridge door. ‘There’s no apple
juice.’ Apple juice, I remembered now, was too
expensive. ‘Ribena?’
He shook his head.
‘Water?’
He nodded, murmured something that could
have been a thank you as I handed him the glass.
My mother walked into the room, bearing a
huge basket of neatly folded laundry. ‘Are these
yours?’ She brandished a pair of socks.
‘Treena’s, I think.’
‘I thought so. Odd colour. I think they must
have got in with Daddy’s plum pyjamas. You’re
back early. Are you going somewhere?’
‘No.’ I filled a glass with tap water and drank
it.
‘Is Patrick coming round later? He rang here
earlier. Did you have your mobile off?’
‘Mm.’
‘He said he’s after booking your holiday.
Your father says he saw something on the television
about it. Where is it you liked? Ipsos?
Kalypsos?’
‘Skiathos.’
‘That’s the one. You want to check your hotel
very carefully. Do it on the internet. He and
Daddy watched something on the news at lunchtime.
Apparently they’re building sites, half of
those budget deals, and you wouldn’t know until
you got there. Daddy, would you like a cup of
tea? Did Lou not offer you one?’ She put the
kettle on then glanced up at me. It’s possible she
had finally noticed I wasn’t saying anything.
‘Are you all right, love? You look awfully pale.’
She reached out a hand and felt my forehead,
as if I were much younger than twenty-six.
‘I don’t think we’re going on holiday.’
My mother’s hand stilled. Her gaze had that
X-ray thing that it had held since I was a kid.
‘Are you and Pat having some problems?’
‘Mum, I –’
‘I’m not trying to interfere. It’s just, you’ve
been together an awful long time. It’s only natural
if things get a bit sticky every now and then. I
mean, me and your father we –’
‘I lost my job.’
My voice cut into the silence. The words hung
there, searing themselves on the little room long
after the sound had died away.
‘You what?’
‘Frank’s shutting down the cafe. From tomorrow.’
I held out a hand with the slightly damp
envelope I had gripped in shock the entire journey
home. All 180 steps from the bus stop. ‘He’s
given me my three months’ money.’
The day had started like any other day. Everyone
I knew hated Monday mornings, but I never
minded them. I liked arriving early at The
Buttered Bun, firing up the huge tea urn in the
corner, bringing in the crates of milk and bread
from the backyard and chatting to Frank as we
prepared to open.
I liked the fuggy bacon-scented warmth of the
cafe, the little bursts of cool air as the door
opened and closed, the low murmur of conversation
and, when quiet, Frank’s radio singing tinnily
to itself in the corner. It wasn’t a fashionable
place – its walls were covered in scenes from the
castle up on the hill, the tables still sported
Formica tops, and the menu hadn’t altered since
I started, apart from a few changes to the chocolate
bar selection and the addition of chocolate
brownies and muffins to the iced bun tray.
But most of all I liked the customers. I liked
Kev and Angelo, the plumbers, who came in
most mornings and teased Frank about where his
meat might have come from. I liked the Dandelion
Lady, nicknamed for her shock of white hair,
who ate one egg and chips from Monday to
Thursday and sat reading the complimentary
newspapers and drinking her way through two
cups of tea. I always made an effort to chat with
her. I suspected it might be the only conversation
the old woman got all day.
I liked the tourists, who stopped on their walk
up and down from the castle, the shrieking
schoolchildren, who stopped by after school, the
regulars from the offices across the road, and
Nina and Cherie, the hairdressers, who knew the
calorie count of every single item The Buttered
Bun had to offer. Even the annoying customers,
like the red-haired woman who ran the toyshop
and disputed her change at least once a week,
didn’t trouble me.
I watched relationships begin and end across
those tables, children transferred between divorcees,
the guilty relief of those parents who
couldn’t face cooking, and the secret pleasure of
pensioners at a fried breakfast. All human life
came through, and most of them shared a few
words with me, trading jokes or comments over
the mugs of steaming tea. Dad always said he
never knew what was going to come out of my
mouth next, but in the cafe it didn’t matter.
Frank liked me. He was quiet by nature, and
said having me there kept the place lively. It was
a bit like being a barmaid, but without the hassle
of drunks.
And then that afternoon, after the lunchtime
rush had ended, and with the place briefly
empty, Frank, wiping his hands on his apron,
had come out from behind the hotplate and
turned the little Closed sign to face the street.
‘Now now, Frank, I’ve told you before. Extras
are not included in the minimum wage.’ Frank
was, as Dad put it, as queer as a blue gnu. I
looked up.
He wasn’t smiling.
‘Uh-oh. I didn’t put salt in the sugar cellars
again, did I?’
He was twisting a tea towel between his two
hands and looked more uncomfortable than I had
ever seen him. I wondered, briefly, whether
someone had complained about me. And then he
motioned to me to sit down.
‘Sorry, Louisa,’ he said, after he had told me.
‘But I’m going back to Australia. My Dad’s not
too good, and it looks like the castle is definitely
going to start doing its own refreshments. The
writing’s on the wall.’
I think I sat there with my mouth actually
hanging open. And then Frank had handed me
the envelope, and answered my next question before
it left my lips. ‘I know we never had, you
know, a formal contract or anything, but I
wanted to look after you. There’s three months’
money in there. We close tomorrow.’
‘Three months!’ Dad exploded, as my mother
thrust a cup of sweet tea into my hands. ‘Well,
that’s big of him, given she’s worked like a
ruddy Trojan in that place for the last six years.’
‘Bernard.’ Mum shot him a warning look,
nodding towards Thomas. My parents minded
him after school every day until Treena finished
work.
‘What the hell is she supposed to do now? He
could have given her more than a day’s bloody
notice.’
‘Well … she’ll just have to get another job.’
‘There are no bloody jobs, Josie. You know
that as well as I do. We’re in the middle of a
bloody recession.’
Mum shut her eyes for a moment, as if composing
herself before she spoke. ‘She’s a bright
girl. She’ll find herself something. She’s got a
solid employment record, hasn’t she? Frank will
give her a good reference.’
‘Oh, fecking marvellous … “Louisa Clark is
very good at buttering toast, and a dab hand with
the old teapot.”’
‘Thanks for the vote of confidence, Dad.’
‘I’m just saying.’
I knew the real reason for Dad’s anxiety. They
relied on my wages. Treena earned next to nothing
at the flower shop. Mum couldn’t work, as
she had to look after Granddad, and Granddad’s
pension amounted to almost nothing. Dad lived
in a constant state of anxiety about his job at the
furniture factory. His boss had been muttering
about possible redundancies for months. There
were murmurings at home about debts and the
juggling of credit cards. Dad had had his car
written off by an uninsured driver two years previously,
and somehow this had been enough for
the whole teetering edifice that was my parents’
finances to finally collapse. My modest wages
had been a little bedrock of housekeeping
money, enough to help see the family through
from week to week.
‘Let’s not get ahead of ourselves. She can
head down to the Job Centre tomorrow and see
what’s on offer. She’s got enough to get by for
now.’ They spoke as if I weren’t there. ‘And
she’s smart. You’re smart, aren’t you, love? Perhaps
she could do a typing course. Go into office
work.’
I sat there, as my parents discussed what other
jobs my limited qualifications might entitle me
to. Factory work, machinist, roll butterer. For the
first time that afternoon I wanted to cry. Thomas
watched me with big, round eyes, and silently
handed me half a soggy biscuit.
‘Thanks, Tommo,’ I mouthed silently, and ate
it.
He was down at the athletics club, as I had
known he would be. Mondays to Thursdays, regular
as a station timetable, Patrick was there in
the gym or running in circles around the floodlit
track. I made my way down the steps, hugging
myself against the cold, and walked slowly out
on to the track, waving as he came close enough
to see who it was.
‘Run with me,’ he puffed, as he got closer. His
breath came in pale clouds. ‘I’ve got four laps to
go.’
I hesitated just a moment, and then began to
run alongside him. It was the only way I was going
to get any kind of conversation out of him. I
was wearing my pink trainers with the turquoise
laces, the only shoes I could possibly run in.
I had spent the day at home, trying to be useful.
I’m guessing it was about an hour before I
started to get under my mother’s feet. Mum and
Granddad had their routines, and having me
there interrupted them. Dad was asleep, as he
was on nights this month, and not to be disturbed.
I tidied my room, then sat and watched
television with the sound down and when I remembered,
periodically, why I was at home in
the middle of the day I had felt an actual brief
pain in my chest.
‘I wasn’t expecting you.’
‘I got fed up at home. I thought maybe we
could do something.’
He looked sideways at me. There was a fine
film of sweat on his face. ‘The sooner you get
another job, babe, the better.’
‘It’s all of twenty-four hours since I lost the
last one. Am I allowed to just be a bit miserable
and floppy? You know, just for today?’
‘But you’ve got to look at the positive side.
You knew you couldn’t stay at that place
forever. You want to move upwards, onwards.’
Patrick had been named Stortfold Young Entrepreneur
of the Year two years previously, and
had not yet quite recovered from the honour. He
had since acquired a business partner, Ginger
Pete, offering personal training to clients over a
40-mile area, and two liveried vans on the HP.
He also had a whiteboard in his office, on which
he liked to scrawl his projected turnover with
thick black markers, working and reworking the
figures until they met with his satisfaction. I was
never entirely sure that they bore any resemblance
to real life.
‘Being made redundant can change people’s
lives, Lou.’ He glanced at his watch, checking
his lap time. ‘What do you want to do? You
could retrain. I’m sure they do a grant for people
like you.’
‘People like me?’
‘People looking for a new opportunity. What
do you want to be? You could be a beautician.
You’re pretty enough.’ He nudged me as we ran,
as if I should be grateful for the compliment.
‘You know my beauty routine. Soap, water,
the odd paper bag.’
Patrick was beginning to look exasperated.
I was starting to lag behind. I hate running. I
hated him for not slowing down.
‘Look … shop assistant. Secretary. Estate
agent. I don’t know … there must be something
you want to do.’
But there wasn’t. I had liked it in the cafe. I
liked knowing everything there was to know
about The Buttered Bun, and hearing about the
lives of the people who came through it. I had
felt comfortable there.
‘You can’t mope around, babe. Got to get over
it. All the best entrepreneurs fight their way back
from rock bottom. Jeffrey Archer did it. So did
Richard Branson.’ He tapped my arm, trying to
get me to keep up.
‘I doubt if Jeffrey Archer ever got made redundant
from toasting teacakes.’ I was out of
breath. And I was wearing the wrong bra. I
slowed, dropped my hands down on to my
knees.
He turned, running backwards, his voice carrying
on the still, cold air. ‘But if he had … I’m
just saying. Sleep on it, put on a smart suit and
head down to the Job Centre. Or I’ll train you up
to work with me, if you like. You know there’s
money in it. And don’t worry about the holiday.
I’ll pay.’
I smiled at him.
He blew a kiss and his voice echoed across the
empty stadium. ‘You can pay me back when
you’re back on your feet.’
I made my first claim for Jobseeker’s Allowance.
I attended a 45-minute interview, and a
group interview, where I sat with a group of
twenty or so mismatched men and women, half
of whom wore the same slightly stunned expression
I suspected I did, and the other half the
blank, uninterested faces of people who had been
here too many times before. I wore what my Dad
deemed my ‘civilian’ clothes.
As a result of these efforts, I had endured a
brief stint filling in on a night shift at a chicken
processing factory (it had given me nightmares
for weeks), and two days at a training session as
a Home Energy Adviser. I had realized pretty
quickly that I was essentially being instructed to
befuddle old people into switching energy suppliers,
and told Syed, my personal ‘adviser’ that
I couldn’t do it. He had been insistent that I continue,
so I had listed some of the practices that
they had asked me to employ, at which point he
had gone a bit quiet and suggested we (it was always
‘we’ even though it was pretty obvious that
one of us had a job) try something else.
I did two weeks at a fast food chain. The
hours were okay, I could cope with the fact that
the uniform made my hair static, but I found it
impossible to stick to the ‘appropriate responses’
script, with its ‘How can I help you today?’ and
its ‘Would you like large fries with that?’ I had
been let go after one of the doughnut girls caught
me debating the varying merits of the free toys
with a four-year-old. What can I say? She was a
smart four-year-old. I also thought the Sleeping
Beauties were sappy.
Now I sat at my fourth interview as Syed
scanned through the touch screen for further employment
‘opportunities’. Even Syed, who wore
the grimly cheerful demeanour of someone who
had shoehorned the most unlikely candidates into
a job, was starting to sound a little weary.
‘Um … Have you ever considered joining the
entertainment industry?’
‘What, as in pantomime dame?’
‘Actually, no. But there is an opening for a
pole dancer. Several, in fact.’
I raised an eyebrow. ‘Please tell me you are
kidding.’
‘It’s thirty hours a week on a self-employed
basis. I believe the tips are good.’
‘Please, please tell me you have not just advised
me to get a job that involves parading
around in front of strangers in my underwear.’
‘You said you were good with people. And
you seem to like … theatrical … clothing.’ He
glanced at my tights, which were green and glittery.
I had thought they would cheer me up. Thomas
had hummed the theme tune from The Little
Mermaid at me for almost the whole of breakfast.
Syed tapped something into his keyboard.
‘How about “adult chat line supervisor”?’
I stared at him.
He shrugged. ‘You said you liked talking to
people.’
‘No. And no to semi-nude bar staff. Or masseuse.
Or webcam operator. Come on, Syed.
There must be something I can do that wouldn’t
actually give my dad a heart attack.’
This appeared to stump him. ‘There’s not
much left outside flexi-hour retail opportunities.’
‘Night-time shelf stacking?’ I had been here
enough times now to speak their language.
‘There’s a waiting list. Parents tend to go for
it, because it suits the school hours,’ he said apologetically.
He studied the screen again. ‘So
we’re really left with care assistant.’
‘Wiping old people’s bottoms.’
‘I’m afraid, Louisa, you’re not qualified for
much else. If you wanted to retrain, I’d be happy
to point you in the right direction. There are
plenty of courses at the adult education centre.’
‘But we’ve been through this, Syed. If I do
that, I lose my Jobseeker money, right?’
‘If you’re not available for work, yes.’
We sat there in silence for a moment. I gazed
at the doors, where two burly security men
stood. I wondered if they had got the job through
the Job Centre.
‘I’m not good with old people, Syed. My
granddad lives at home since he had his strokes,
and I can’t cope with him.’
‘Ah. So you have some experience of caring.’
‘Not really. My mum does everything for
him.’
‘Would your mum like a job?’
‘Funny.’
‘I’m not being funny.’
‘And leave me looking after my granddad? No
thanks. That’s from him, as well as me, by the
way. Haven’t you got anything in any cafes?’
‘I don’t think there are enough cafes left to
guarantee you employment, Louisa. We could
try Kentucky Fried Chicken. You might get on
better there.’
‘Because I’d get so much more out of offering
a Bargain Bucket than a Chicken McNugget? I
don’t think so.’
‘Well, then perhaps we’ll have to look further
afield.’
‘There are only four buses to and from our
town. You know that. And I know you said I
should look into the tourist bus, but I rang the
station and it stops at 5pm. Plus it’s twice as expensive
as the normal bus.’
Syed sat back in his seat. ‘At this point in proceedings,
Louisa, I really need to make the point
that as a fit and able person, in order to continue
qualifying for your allowance, you need –’
‘– to show that I’m trying to get a job. I
know.’
How could I explain to this man how much I
wanted to work? Did he have the slightest idea
how much I missed my old job? Unemployment
had been a concept, something droningly referred
to on the news in relation to shipyards or
car factories. I had never considered that you
might miss a job like you missed a limb – a constant,
reflexive thing. I hadn’t thought that as
well as the obvious fears about money, and your
future, losing your job would make you feel inadequate,
and a bit useless. That it would be
harder to get up in the morning than when you
were rudely shocked into consciousness by the
alarm. That you might miss the people you
worked with, no matter how little you had in
common with them. Or even that you might find
yourself searching for familiar faces as you
walked the high street. The first time I had seen
the Dandelion Lady wandering past the shops,
looking as aimless as I felt, I had fought the urge
to go and give her a hug.
Syed’s voice broke into my reverie. ‘Aha.
Now this might work.’
I tried to peer round at the screen.
‘Just come in. This very minute. Care assistant
position.’
‘I told you I was no good with –’
‘It’s not old people. It’s a … a private position.
To help in someone’s house, and the address
is less than two miles from your home.
“Care and companionship for a disabled man.”
Can you drive?’
‘Yes. But would I have to wipe his –’
‘No bottom wiping required, as far as I can
tell.’ He scanned the screen. ‘He’s a … a quadriplegic.
He needs someone in the daylight hours
to help feed and assist. Often in these jobs it’s a
case of being there when they want to go out
somewhere, helping with basic stuff that they
can’t do themselves. Oh. It’s good money. Quite
a lot more than the minimum wage.’
‘That’s probably because it involves bottom
wiping.’
‘I’ll ring them to confirm the absence of bottom
wiping. But if that’s the case, you’ll go
along for the interview?’
He said it like it was a question.
But we both knew the answer.
I sighed, and gathered up my bag ready for the
trip home.
‘Jesus Christ,’ said my father. ‘Can you imagine?
If it wasn’t punishment enough ending up
in a ruddy wheelchair, then you get our Lou
turning up to keep you company.’
‘Bernard!’ my mother scolded.
Behind me, Granddad was laughing into his
mug of tea.I am not thick. I’d just like to get that out of the
way at this point. But it’s quite hard not to feel a
bit deficient in the Department of Brain Cells,
growing up next to a younger sister who was not
just moved up a year into my class, but then to the
year above.
Everything that is sensible, or smart, Katrina
did first, despite being eighteen months younger
than me. Every book I ever read she had read
first, every fact I mentioned at the dinner table she
already knew. She is the only person I know who
actually likes exams. Sometimes I think I dress
the way I do because the one thing Treena can’t
do is put clothes together. She’s a pullover and
jeans kind of a girl. Her idea of smart is ironing
the jeans first.
My father calls me a ‘character’, because I
tend to say the first thing that pops into my head.
He says I’m like my Aunt Lily, who I never
knew. It’s a bit weird, constantly being compared
to someone you’ve never met. I would
come downstairs in purple boots, and Dad would
nod at Mum and say, ‘D’you remember Aunt
Lily and her purple boots, eh?’ and Mum would
cluck and start laughing as if at some secret joke.
My mother calls me ‘individual’, which is her
polite way of not quite understanding the way I
dress.
But apart from a brief period in my teens, I
never wanted to look like Treena, or any of the
girls at school; I preferred boys’ clothes till I was
about fourteen, and now tend to please myself –
depending on what mood I am in on the day.
There’s no point me trying to look conventional.
I am small, dark-haired and, according to my
dad, have the face of an elf. That’s not as in
‘elfin beauty’. I am not plain, but I don’t think
anyone is ever going to call me beautiful. I don’t
have that graceful thing going on. Patrick calls
me gorgeous when he wants to get his leg over,
but he’s fairly transparent like that. We’ve
known each other for coming up to seven years.
I was twenty-six years old and I wasn’t really
sure what I was. Up until I lost my job I hadn’t
even given it any thought. I supposed I would
probably marry Patrick, knock out a few kids,
live a few streets away from where I had always
lived. Apart from an exotic taste in clothes, and
the fact that I’m a bit short, there’s not a lot separating
me from anyone you might pass in the
street. You probably wouldn’t look at me twice.
An ordinary girl, leading an ordinary life. It actually
suited me fine.
‘You must wear a suit to an interview,’ Mum
had insisted. ‘Everyone’s far too casual these
days.’
‘Because wearing pinstripes will be vital if
I’m spoon-feeding a geriatric.’
‘Don’t be smart.’
‘I can’t afford to buy a suit. What if I don’t get
the job?’
‘You can wear mine, and I’ll iron you a nice
blouse, and just for once don’t wear your hair up
in those –’ she gestured to my hair, which was
normally twisted into two dark knots on each
side of my head ‘– Princess Leia things. Just try
to look like a normal person.’
I knew better than to argue with my mother.
And I could tell Dad had been instructed not to
comment on my outfit as I walked out of the
house, my gait awkward in the too-tight skirt.
‘Bye love,’ he said, the corners of his mouth
twitching. ‘Good luck now. You look
very … businesslike.’
The embarrassing thing was not that I was
wearing my mother’s suit, or that it was in a cut
last fashionable in the late 1980s, but that it was
actually a tiny bit small for me. I felt the waistband
cutting into my midriff, and pulled the
double-breasted jacket across. As Dad says of
Mum, there’s more fat on a kirby grip.
I sat through the short bus journey feeling
faintly sick. I had never had a proper job interview.
I had joined The Buttered Bun after
Treena bet me that I couldn’t get a job in a day. I
had walked in and simply asked Frank if he
needed a spare pair of hands. It had been his first
day open and he had looked almost blinded by
gratitude.
Now, looking back, I couldn’t even remember
having a discussion with him about money. He
suggested a weekly wage, I agreed, and once a
year he told me he’d upped it a bit, usually by a
little more than I would have asked for.
What did people ask in interviews anyway?
And what if they asked me to do something
practical with this old man, to feed him or bath
him or something? Syed had said there was a
male carer who covered his ‘intimate needs’ (I
shuddered at the phrase). The secondary carer’s
job was, he said, ‘a little unclear at this point’. I
pictured myself wiping drool from the old man’s
mouth, maybe asking loudly, ‘DID HE WANT
A CUP OF TEA?’
When Granddad had first begun his recovery
from his strokes he hadn’t been able to do anything
for himself. Mum had done it all. ‘Your
mother is a saint,’ Dad said, which I took to
mean that she wiped his bum without running
screaming from the house. I was pretty sure
nobody had ever described me as such. I cut
Granddad’s food up for him and made him cups
of tea but as for anything else, I wasn’t sure I
was made of the right ingredients.
Granta House was on the other side of Stortfold
Castle, close to the medieval walls, on the
long unpavemented stretch that comprised only
four houses and the National Trust shop, bang in
the middle of the tourist area. I had passed this
house a million times in my life without ever actually
properly seeing it. Now, walking past the
car park and the miniature railway, both of
which were empty and as bleak as only a summer
attraction can look in February, I saw it was
bigger than I had imagined, red brick with a
double front, the kind of house you saw in old
copies of Country Life while waiting at the doctor’s.
I walked up the long drive, trying not to think
about whether anybody was watching out of the
window. Walking up a long drive puts you at a
disadvantage; it automatically makes you feel inferior.
I was just contemplating whether to actually
tug at my forelock, when the door opened
and I jumped.
A woman, not much older than me, stepped
out into the porch. She was wearing white slacks
and a medical-looking tunic and carried a coat
and a folder under her arm. As she passed me
she gave a polite smile.
‘And thank you so much for coming,’ a voice
said, from inside. ‘We’ll be in touch. Ah.’ A woman’s
face appeared, middle-aged but beautiful,
under expensive precision-cut hair. She was
wearing a trouser suit that I guessed cost more
than my dad earned in a month.
‘You must be Miss Clark.’
‘Louisa.’ I shot out a hand, as my mother had
impressed upon me to do. The young people
never offered up a hand these days, my parents
had agreed. In the old days you wouldn’t have
dreamt of a ‘hiya’ or, worse, an air kiss. This
woman did not look like she would have welcomed
an air kiss.
‘Right. Yes. Do come in.’ She withdrew her
hand from mine as soon as humanly possible,
but I felt her eyes linger upon me, as if she were
already assessing me.
‘Would you like to come through? We’ll talk
in the drawing room. My name is Camilla
Traynor.’ She seemed weary, as if she had
uttered the same words many times that day
already.
I followed her through to a huge room with
floor to ceiling French windows. Heavy curtains
draped elegantly from fat mahogany curtain
poles, and the floors were carpeted with intricately
decorated Persian rugs. It smelt of beeswax
and antique furniture. There were little elegant
side tables everywhere, their burnished surfaces
covered with ornamental boxes. I wondered
briefly where on earth the Traynors put their
cups of tea.
‘So you have come via the Job Centre advertisement,
is that right? Do sit down.’
While she flicked through her folder of papers,
I gazed surreptitiously around the room. I
had thought the house might be a bit like a care
home, all hoists and wipe-clean surfaces. But
this was like one of those scarily expensive hotels,
steeped in old money, with well-loved
things that looked valuable in their own right.
There were silver-framed photographs on a sideboard,
but they were too far away for me to
make out the faces. As she scanned her pages, I
shifted in my seat, to try to get a better look.
And it was then that I heard it – the unmistakable
sound of stitches ripping. I glanced down to
see the two pieces of material that joined at the
side of my right leg had torn apart, sending
frayed pieces of silk thread shooting upwards in
an ungainly fringe. I felt my face flood with colour.
‘So … Miss Clark …do you have any experience
with quadriplegia?’
I turned to face Mrs Traynor, wriggling so that
my jacket covered as much of the skirt as possible.
‘No.’
‘Have you been a carer for long?’
‘Um … I’ve never actually done it,’ I said,
adding, as if I could hear Syed’s voice in my ear,
‘but I’m sure I could learn.’
‘Do you know what a quadriplegic is?’
I faltered. ‘When … you’re stuck in a wheelchair?’
‘I suppose that’s one way of putting it. There
are varying degrees, but in this case we are talking
about complete loss of use of the legs, and
very limited use of the hands and arms. Would
that bother you?’
‘Well, not as much as it would bother him, obviously.’
I raised a smile, but Mrs Traynor’s face
was expressionless. ‘Sorry – I didn’t mean –’
‘Can you drive, Miss Clark?’
‘Yes.’
‘Clean licence?’
I nodded.
Camilla Traynor ticked something on her list.
The rip was growing. I could see it creeping
inexorably up my thigh. At this rate, by the time
I stood up I would look like a Vegas showgirl.
‘Are you all right?’ Mrs Traynor was gazing
at me.
‘I’m just a little warm. Do you mind if I take
my jacket off?’ Before she could say anything, I
wrenched the jacket off in one fluid motion and
tied it around my waist, obscuring the split in the
skirt. ‘So hot,’ I said, smiling at her, ‘coming in
from outside. You know.’
There was the faintest pause, and then Mrs
Traynor looked back at her folder. ‘How old are
you?’
‘I’m twenty-six.’
‘And you were in your previous job for six
years.’
‘Yes. You should have a copy of my reference.’
‘Mm … ’ Mrs Traynor held it up and squinted.
‘Your previous employer says you are a
“warm, chatty and life-enhancing presence”.’
‘Yes, I paid him.’
That poker face again.
Oh hell, I thought.
It was as if I were being studied. Not necessarily
in a good way. My mother’s shirt felt suddenly
cheap, the synthetic threads shining in the
thin light. I should just have worn my plainest
trousers and a shirt. Anything but this suit.
‘So why are you leaving this job, where you
are clearly so well regarded?’
‘Frank – the owner – sold the cafe. It’s the one
at the bottom of the castle. The Buttered Bun.
Was,’ I corrected myself. ‘I would have been
happy to stay.’
Mrs Traynor nodded, either because she didn’t
feel the need to say anything further about it, or
because she too would have been happy for me
to stay there.
‘And what exactly do you want to do with
your life?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘Do you have aspirations for a career? Would
this be a stepping stone to something else? Do
you have a professional dream that you wish to
pursue?’
I looked at her blankly.
Was this some kind of trick question?
‘I … I haven’t really thought that far. Since I
lost my job. I just –’ I swallowed. ‘I just want to
work again.’
It sounded feeble. What kind of person came
to an interview without even knowing what she
wanted to do? Mrs Traynor’s expression suggested
she thought the same thing.
She put down her pen. ‘So, Miss Clark, why
should I employ you instead of, say, the previous
candidate, who has several years’ experience
with quadriplegics?’
I looked at her. ‘Um …honestly? I don’t
know.’ This met with silence, so I added, ‘I
guess that would be your call.’
‘You can’t give me a single reason why I
should employ you?’
My mother’s face suddenly swam into view.
The thought of going home with a ruined suit
and another interview failure was beyond me.
And this job paid more than £9 an hour.
I sat up a bit. ‘Well … I’m a fast learner, I’m
never ill, I only live on the other side of the
castle, and I’m stronger than I look … probably
strong enough to help move your husband
around –’
‘My husband? It’s not my husband you’d be
working with. It’s my son.’
‘Your son?’ I blinked. ‘Um … I’m not afraid
of hard work. I’m good at dealing with all sorts
of people and … and I make a mean cup of tea.’
I began to blather into the silence. The thought
of it being her son had thrown me. ‘I mean, my
dad seems to think that’s not the greatest reference.
But in my experience there’s not much that
can’t be fixed by a decent cup of tea … ’
There was something a bit strange about the
way Mrs Traynor was looking at me.
‘Sorry,’ I spluttered, as I realized what I had
said. ‘I’m not suggesting the thing … the paraplegia
… quadriplegia … with … your
son … could be solved by a cup of tea.’
‘I should tell you, Miss Clark, that this is not a
permanent contract. It would be for a maximum
of six months. That is why the salary is … commensurate.
We wanted to attract the right person.’
‘Believe me, when you’ve done shifts at a
chicken processing factory, working in Guantánamo
Bay for six months looks attractive.’ Oh,
shut up, Louisa. I bit my lip.
But Mrs Traynor seemed oblivious. She
closed her file. ‘My son – Will – was injured in a
road accident almost two years ago. He requires
twenty-four-hour care, the majority of which is
provided by a trained nurse. I have recently returned
to work, and the carer would be required
to be here throughout the day to keep him company,
help him with food and drink, generally
provide an extra pair of hands, and make sure
that he comes to no harm.’ Camilla Traynor
looked down at her lap. ‘It is of the utmost importance
that Will has someone here who understands
that responsibility.’
Everything she said, even the way she emphasized
her words, seemed to hint at some stupidity
on my part.
‘I can see that.’ I began to gather up my bag.
‘So would you like the job?’
It was so unexpected that at first I thought I
had heard her wrong. ‘Sorry?’
‘We would need you to start as soon as possible.
Payment will be weekly.’
I was briefly lost for words. ‘You’d rather
have me instead of –’ I began.
‘The hours are quite lengthy – 8am till 5pm,
sometimes later. There is no lunch break as such,
although when Nathan, his daily nurse, comes in
at lunchtime to attend to him, there should be a
free half an hour.’
‘You wouldn’t need anything … medical?’
‘Will has all the medical care we can offer
him. What we want for him is somebody robust
… and upbeat. His life is … complicated,
and it is important that he is encouraged to –’
She broke off, her gaze fixed on something outside
the French windows. Finally, she turned
back to me. ‘Well, let’s just say that his mental
welfare is as important to us as his physical welfare.
Do you understand?’
‘I think so. Would I …wear a uniform?’
‘No. Definitely no uniform.’ She glanced at
my legs. ‘Although you might want to
wear … something a bit less revealing.’
I glanced down to where my jacket had shifted,
revealing a generous expanse of bare thigh.
‘It … I’m sorry. It ripped. It’s not actually mine.’
But Mrs Traynor no longer appeared to be
listening. ‘I’ll explain what needs doing when
you start. Will is not the easiest person to be
around at the moment, Miss Clark. This job is
going to be about mental attitude as much as
any … professional skills you might have. So.
We will see you tomorrow?’
‘Tomorrow? You don’t want … you don’t
want me to meet him?’
‘Will is not having a good day. I think it’s best
that we start afresh then.’
I stood up, realizing Mrs Traynor was already
waiting to see me out.
‘Yes,’ I said, tugging Mum’s jacket across me.
‘Um. Thank you. I’ll see you at eight o’clock tomorrow.’
Mum was spooning potatoes on to Dad’s plate.
She put two on, he parried, lifting a third and
fourth from the serving dish. She blocked him,
steering them back on to the serving dish, finally
rapping him on the knuckles with the serving
spoon when he made for them again. Around the
little table sat my parents, my sister and Thomas,
my granddad, and Patrick – who always came
for dinner on Wednesdays.
‘Daddy,’ Mum said to Granddad. ‘Would you
like someone to cut your meat? Treena, will you
cut Daddy’s meat?’
Treena leant across and began slicing at
Granddad’s plate with deft strokes. On the other
side she had already done the same for Thomas.
‘So how messed up is this man, Lou?’
‘Can’t be up to much if they’re willing to let
our daughter loose on him,’ Bernard remarked.
Behind me, the television was on so that Dad
and Patrick could watch the football. Every now
and then they would stop, peering round me,
their mouths stopping mid-chew as they watched
some pass or near miss.
‘I think it’s a great opportunity. She’ll be
working in one of the big houses. For a good
family. Are they posh, love?’
In our street ‘posh’ could mean anyone who
hadn’t got a family member in possession of an
ASBO.
‘I suppose so.’
‘Hope you’ve practised your curtsy.’ Dad
grinned.
‘Did you actually meet him?’ Treena leant
across to stop Thomas elbowing his juice on to
the floor. ‘The crippled man? What was he like?’
‘I meet him tomorrow.’
‘Weird, though. You’ll be spending all day
every day with him. Nine hours. You’ll see him
more than you see Patrick.’
‘That’s not hard,’ I said.
Patrick, across the table, pretended he couldn’t
hear me.
‘Still, you won’t have to worry about the old
sexual harassment, eh?’ Dad said.
‘Bernard!’ said my mother, sharply.
‘I’m only saying what everyone’s thinking.
Probably the best boss you could find for your
girlfriend, eh, Patrick?’
Across the table, Patrick smiled. He was busy
refusing potatoes, despite Mum’s best efforts. He
was having a non-carb month, ready for a marathon
in early March.
‘You know, I was thinking, will you have to
learn sign language? I mean, if he can’t communicate,
how will you know what he wants?’
‘She didn’t say he couldn’t talk, Mum.’ I
couldn’t actually remember what Mrs Traynor
had said. I was still vaguely in shock at actually
having been given a job.
‘Maybe he talks through one of those devices.
Like that scientist bloke. The one on The
Simpsons.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas.
‘Nope,’ said Bernard.
‘Stephen Hawking,’ said Patrick.
‘That’s you, that is,’ Mum said, looking accusingly
from Thomas to Dad. She could cut
steak with that look. ‘Teaching him bad language.’
‘It is not. I don’t know where he’s getting it
from.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas, looking directly at his
grandfather.
Treena made a face. ‘I think it would freak me
out, if he talked through one of those voice
boxes. Can you imagine? Get-me-a-drink-of-water,’
she mimicked.
Bright – but not bright enough not to get herself
up the duff, as Dad occasionally muttered.
She had been the first member of our family to
go to university, until Thomas’s arrival had
caused her to drop out during her final year.
Mum and Dad still held out hopes that one day
she would bring the family a fortune. Or possibly
work in a place with a reception desk that
didn’t have a security screen around it. Either
would do.
‘Why would being in a wheelchair mean he
had to speak like a Dalek?’ I said.
‘But you’re going to have to get up close and
personal to him. At the very least you’ll have to
wipe his mouth and give him drinks and stuff.’
‘So? It’s hardly rocket science.’
‘Says the woman who used to put Thomas’s
nappy on inside out.’
‘That was once.’
‘Twice. And you only changed him three
times.’
I helped myself to green beans, trying to look
more sanguine than I felt.
But even as I had ridden the bus home, the
same thoughts had already started buzzing
around my head. What would we talk about?
What if he just stared at me, head lolling, all
day? Would I be freaked out? What if I couldn’t
understand what it was he wanted? I was legendarily
bad at caring for things; we no longer
had houseplants at home, or pets, after the disasters
that were the hamster, the stick insects and
Randolph the goldfish. And how often was that
stiff mother of his going to be around? I didn’t
like the thought of being watched all the time.
Mrs Traynor seemed like the kind of woman
whose gaze turned capable hands into fingers
and thumbs.
‘Patrick, what do you think of it all, then?’
Patrick took a long slug of water, and
shrugged.
Outside, the rain beat on the windowpanes,
just audible over the clatter of plates and cutlery.
‘It’s good money, Bernard. Better than working
nights at the chicken factory, anyway.’
There was a general murmur of agreement
around the table.
‘Well, it comes to something when the best
you can all say about my new career is that it’s
better than hauling chicken carcasses around the
inside of an aircraft hangar,’ I said.
‘Well, you could always get fit in the meantime
and go and do some of your personal training
stuff with Patrick here.’
‘Get fit. Thanks, Dad.’ I had been about to
reach for another potato, and now changed my
mind.
‘Well, why not?’ Mum looked as if she might
actually sit down – everyone paused briefly, but
no, she was up again, helping Granddad to some
gravy. ‘It might be worth bearing in mind for the
future. You’ve certainly got the gift of the gab.’
‘She has the gift of the flab.’ Dad snorted.
‘I’ve just got myself a job,’ I said. ‘Paying
more than the last one too, if you don’t mind.’
‘But it is only temporary,’ Patrick interjected.
‘Your Dad’s right. You might want to start getting
in shape while you do it. You could be a
good personal trainer, if you put in a bit of effort.’
‘I don’t want to be a personal trainer. I don’t
fancy … all that … bouncing.’ I mouthed an insult
at Patrick, who grinned.
‘What Lou wants is a job where she can put
her feet up and watch daytime telly while feeding
old Ironside there through a straw,’ said
Treena.
‘Yes. Because rearranging limp dahlias into
buckets of water requires so much physical and
mental effort, doesn’t it, Treen?’
‘We’re teasing you, love.’ Dad raised his mug
of tea. ‘It’s great that you’ve got a job. We’re
proud of you already. And I bet you, once you
slide those feet of yours under the table at the big
house those buggers won’t want to get rid of
you.’
‘Bugger,’ said Thomas.
‘Not me,’ said Dad, chewing, before Mum
could say a thing.